              Me thod Lookup and
                                 6
               C o n s t a n t  L o o k u p




As we saw in Chapter 5, classes play an important role
in Ruby, holding method definitions and constant
values, among other things. We also learned how
Ruby implements inheritance using the super pointer
in each RClass structure.
    In fact, as your program grows, you might imagine it organized by class
and superclass, creating a kind of giant tree structure. At the base is the
Object class (or, actually, the internal BasicObject class). This class is Ruby’s
default superclass, and all of your classes appear somewhere higher up in
the tree, branching out in different directions. In this chapter we’ll study
how Ruby uses this superclass tree to look up methods. When you write
code that calls a method, Ruby looks through this tree in a very precise
manner. We’ll step through a concrete example to see the method lookup
process in action.




                    Ruby Under a Microscope
                   © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                       Later in this chapter we’ll learn another way to visualize your Ruby
                  code. Every time you create a new class or module, Ruby adds a new scope
                  to a different tree, a tree based on the syntactical structure of your pro-
                  gram. The trunk of this tree is the top-level scope, or the beginning of your
                  Ruby code file where you start typing. As you define more and more highly
                  nested modules and classes, this tree would grow higher and higher as well.
                  We’ll learn how this syntax, or namespace, tree allows Ruby to find constant
                  definitions, just as the superclass tree allows Ruby to find methods.
                       But before we get to method and constant lookup, let’s get started with
                  a look at Ruby modules. What are modules? How are they different from
                  classes? What happens when you include a module into a class?



                                                                         Roadm ap
                    How Ruby Implements Modules  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 135
                          Modules Are Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .135
                          Including a Module into a Class .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 136
                    Ruby’s Method Lookup Algorithm  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 138
                          A Method Lookup Example  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 139
                          The Method Lookup Algorithm in Action  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 140
                          Multiple Inheritance in Ruby .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 141
                          The Global Method Cache  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 142
                          The Inline Method Cache .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 143
                          Clearing Ruby’s Method Caches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .143
                          Including Two Modules into One Class .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 144
                          Including One Module into Another  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 145
                          A Module#prepend Example  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 146
                          How Ruby Implements Module#prepend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .150
                    Experiment 6-1: Modifying a Module After Including It .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 151
                          Classes See Methods Added to a Module Later  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 152
                          Classes Don’t See Submodules Included Later  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 152
                          Included Classes Share the Method Table with the
                               Original Module  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 153
                          A Close Look at How Ruby Copies Modules  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 154




134   Chapter 6                                 Ruby Under a Microscope
                                               © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
           Constant Lookup .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 155
                   Finding a Constant in a Superclass .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 156
                   How Does Ruby Find a Constant in the Parent Namespace?  .  .  .  .  . 157
           Lexical Scope in Ruby .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 158
                   Creating a Constant for a New Class or Module  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 159
                   Finding a Constant in the Parent Namespace Using
                        Lexical Scope  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 160
                   Ruby’s Constant Lookup Algorithm  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 162
           Experiment 6-2: Which Constant Will Ruby Find First? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 162
                   Ruby’s Actual Constant Lookup Algorithm  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 163
           Summary .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 165



How Ruby Implements Modules
       As you may know, modules are very similar to classes in Ruby. You can create
       a module just as you create a class—by typing the module keyword followed
       by a series of method definitions. But while modules are similar to classes,
       they are handled differently by Ruby in three important ways:

       •     Ruby doesn’t allow you to create objects directly from modules. In prac-
             tice this means that you can’t call the new method on a module because
             new is a method of Class, not of Module.
       •     Ruby doesn’t allow you to specify a superclass for a module.
       •     In addition, you can include a module into a class using the include
             keyword.

            But what are modules exactly? How does Ruby represent them internally?
       Does it use an RModule structure? And what does it mean to “include” a mod-
       ule into a class?

       Modules Are Classes
       As it turns out, internally Ruby implements modules as classes. When you
       create a module, Ruby creates another RClass/rb_classext_struct structure
       pair, just as it would for a new class. For example, suppose we define a new
       module like this.

       module Professor
       end

          Internally, Ruby would create a class, not a module! Figure 6-1 shows
       how Ruby represents a module internally.


                                           Ruby Under a Microscope                                     Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   135
                                          © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                                                                RClass: module
                                                                  RBasic
                                                                       flags


                           VALUE                                       klass               Class pointer


                                                                       m_tbl               Method table

                                                                        ptr




                                                               rb_classext_struct
                                                                       super               Superclass pointer

                                                                                           Class-level
                                                                       iv_tbl
                                                                                           instance variables

                                                                     const_tbl             Constants table

                                                                                           Used by
                                                                       origin
                                                                                           Module#prepend


                  Figure 6-1: The portion of Ruby’s class structures that’s used for modules

                       In this figure I show Ruby’s RClass structure again. However, I’ve
                  removed some of the values from the diagram because modules don’t use
                  all of them. Most importantly, I removed iv_index_tbl because you can’t
                  create object instances of a module—in other words, you can’t call the new
                  method on a module. This means there are no object-level attributes to
                  keep track of. I also removed the refined_class and allocator values because
                  modules don’t use them either. I’ve left the super pointer because modules
                  do have superclasses internally even though you aren’t allowed to specify
                  them yourself.
                       A technical definition of a Ruby module (ignoring the origin value for
                  now) might look like this:
                            A Ruby module is a Ruby object that also contains method defini-
                            tions, a superclass pointer, and a constants table.


                  Including a Module into a Class
                  The real magic behind modules happens when you include a module into a
                  class, as shown in Listing 6-1.

                  module Professor
                  end




136   Chapter 6                          Ruby Under a Microscope
                                        © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
class Mathematician < Person
  include Professor
end

Listing 6-1: Including a module into a class

     When we run Listing 6-1, Ruby creates a copy of the RClass structure
for the Professor module and uses it as the new superclass for Mathematician.
Ruby’s C source code refers to this copy of the module as an included class.
The superclass of the new copy of Professor is set to the original superclass
of Mathematician, which preserves the superclass, or ancestor chain. Figure 6-2
summarizes this somewhat confusing state of affairs.
 Ruby saves your class’s ancestors
using a linked list of super pointers:


                     RClass                         When you include a module,
Mathematician            super                   Ruby inserts a copy of the module
                                               into your class’s superclass linked list:


                                         RClass                               RClass
                                               super                              super
                                                                copy

                                          Included                             Professor
                     RClass                 class
    Person               super




   Another           RClass
 Superclass              super




                     RClass
    Object               super


Figure 6-2: Including a module into a class

     You can see the Mathematician class at the top-left corner of Figure 6-2.
Below it and along the left side, you see its superclass chain: Mathematician’s
superclass is Person, whose superclass is Another Superclass, and so on. The
super pointer in each RClass structure (actually, each rb_classext_struct
structure) points down to the next superclass.
     Now to the Professor module on the right side of Figure 6-2. When
we include this module into the Mathematician class, Ruby changes the
super pointer of Mathematician to point to a copy of Professor and the super
pointer of this copy of Professor to point to Person, the original superclass
of Mathematician.

                        Ruby Under a Microscope               Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   137
                       © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
        NOTE      Ruby implements extend in exactly the same way, except the included class becomes
                  the superclass of the target class’s class, or metaclass. Thus, extend allows you to add
                  class methods to a class.


     Ruby’s Method Lookup Algorithm
                  Whenever you call a method, whenever you “send a message to a receiver”
                  to use object-oriented programming jargon, Ruby needs to determine
                  which class implements that method. Sometimes this is obvious: The
                  receiver’s class might implement the target method. However, this isn’t
                  often the case. It might be that some other module or class in your system
                  implements the method. Ruby uses a very precise algorithm to search
                  through the modules and classes in your program in a particular order to
                  find the target method. An understanding of this process is essential for
                  every Ruby developer, so let’s take a close look at it.
                      The flowchart in Figure 6-3 gives you a graphical picture of Ruby’s
                  method lookup algorithm.

                            set current
                             class to
                             receiver




                          look through
                         method table in
                           current class




                                                         not
                                                       found            set current
                             method                                      class to
                             found?                                   superclass of
                                                                       current class


                                      found




                            call method



                  Figure 6-3: Ruby’s method lookup algorithm

                       This algorithm is remarkably simple, isn’t it? As you can see, Ruby simply
                  follows the super pointers until it finds the class or module that contains


138   Chapter 6                            Ruby Under a Microscope
                                          © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
  the target method. You might imagine that Ruby would have to distinguish
  between modules and classes using some special logic—that it would have
  to handle the case where there are multiple included modules, for example.
  But no, it’s just a simple loop on the super pointer linked list.

  A Method Lookup Example
  In a moment we’ll walk through this algorithm to be sure we understand it
  thoroughly. But first, let’s set up an example we can use that has a class, a
  superclass, and a module. This will allow us to see how classes and modules
  work together inside of Ruby.
      Listing 6-2 shows the Mathematician class with the accessor methods
  first_name and last_name.

  class Mathematician
    attr_accessor :first_name
    attr_accessor :last_name
  end

  Listing 6-2: A simple Ruby class, repeated from Listing 5-1

      Now let’s introduce a superclass. In Listing 6-3, at u we set Person as the
  superclass of Mathematician.

  class Person
  end

u class Mathematician < Person
    attr_accessor :first_name
    attr_accessor :last_name
  end

  Listing 6-3: Person is the superclass of Mathematician.

     We’ll move the name attributes to the Person superclass because not only
  mathematicians have names. We end up with the code shown in Listing 6-4.

  class Person
    attr_accessor :first_name
    attr_accessor :last_name
  end

  class Mathematician < Person
  end

  Listing 6-4: Now the name attributes are in the Person superclass.

      Finally, we’ll include the Professor module into the Mathematician class
  at u. Listing 6-5 shows the completed example.



                        Ruby Under a Microscope             Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   139
                       © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                      class Person
                        attr_accessor :first_name
                        attr_accessor :last_name
                      end

                      module Professor
                        def lectures; end
                      end

                      class Mathematician < Person
                  u     include Professor
                      end

                      Listing 6-5: Now we have a class that includes a module and has a superclass.



                      The Method Lookup Algorithm in Action
                      Now that we have our example set up, we’re ready to see how Ruby finds a
                      method we call. Every time you call any method in one of your programs,
                      Ruby follows the same process we’re about to see here.
                         To kick things off, let’s call a method. Using this code, we create a new
                      mathematician object and set its first name:

                      ramanujan = Mathematician.new
                      ramanujan.first_name = "Srinivasa"

                           To execute this code, Ruby needs to find the first_name= method. Where
                      is this method? How does Ruby find it exactly?
                           First, Ruby gets the class from the ramanujan object via the klass pointer,
                      as shown in Figure 6-4.
                                                                                       Mathematician

                                                        RObject                      RClass
                            ramanujan                           klass                         m_tbl


                      Figure 6-4: Ruby first looks for the first_name= method in the object’s class.

                          Next, Ruby checks to see whether Mathematician implements first_name=
                      directly by looking through its method table, as shown in Figure 6-5.
                           Mathematician

                       RClass
                                 m_tbl                            [ empty ]


                      Figure 6-5: Ruby first looks for first_name= in the class’s
                      method table.



140   Chapter 6                               Ruby Under a Microscope
                                             © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
           Because we’ve moved all of the methods down into the Person super-
       class, the first_name= method is no longer there. Ruby continues through
       the algorithm and gets the superclass of Mathematician using the super
       pointer, as shown in Figure 6-6.

                                            Copy of
          Mathematician                 Professor module

        RClass                         RClass
                 super                          m_tbl                      lectures


       Figure 6-6: The superclass of Mathematician is the copy of the Professor module.

           Remember, this is not the Person class; it’s the included class, which is a
       copy of the Professor module. Because it’s a copy, Ruby looks through the
       method table for Professor. Recall from Listing 6-5 that Professor contains
       only the single method lectures. Ruby won’t find the first_name= method.

NOTE   Notice that because Ruby inserts modules above the original superclass in the super-
       class chain, methods in an included module override methods present in a superclass.
       In this case, if Professor also had a first_name= method, Ruby would call it and not
       the method in Person.

           Because Ruby doesn’t find first_name= in Professor, it continues to iterate
       over the super pointers, but this time it uses the super pointer in Professor, as
       shown in Figure 6-7.

             Copy of
         Professor module                     Person
                                                                        first_name=
        RClass                         RClass                            first_name
                 super                          m_tbl
                                                                         last_name=

                                                                          last_name

       Figure 6-7: The Person class is the superclass of the included copy of the Professor module.

           Note that the superclass of the Professor module—or more precisely,
       the superclass of the included copy of the Professor module—is the Person
       class. This was the original superclass of Mathematician. Finally, Ruby sees the
       first_name= method in the method table for Person. Because it has identified
       which class implements first_name=, Ruby can now call the method using the
       method dispatch process we learned about in Chapter 4.

       Multiple Inheritance in Ruby
       What is most interesting here is that internally, Ruby implements module
       inclusion using class inheritance. Essentially, there is no difference between
       including a module and specifying a superclass. Both procedures make new


                             Ruby Under a Microscope            Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   141
                            © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                  methods available to the target class, and both use the class’s super pointer
                  internally. Including multiple modules into a Ruby class is equivalent to
                  specifying multiple superclasses.
                       Still, Ruby keeps things simple by enforcing a single list of ancestors.
                  While including multiple modules does create multiple superclasses inter-
                  nally, Ruby maintains them in a single list. The result? As a Ruby developer,
                  you get the benefits of multiple inheritance (adding new behavior to a class
                  from as many different modules as you would like) while keeping the sim-
                  plicity of the single inheritance model.
                       Ruby benefits from this simplicity as well! By enforcing this single list
                  of superclass ancestors, its method lookup algorithm can be very simple.
                  Whenever you call a method on an object, Ruby simply has to iterate through
                  the superclass linked list until it finds the class or module that contains the
                  target method.

                  The Global Method Cache
                  Depending on the number of superclasses in the chain, method lookup
                  can be time consuming. To alleviate this, Ruby caches the result of a
                  lookup for later use. It records which class or module implemented the
                  method that your code called in two caches: a global method cache and
                  an inline method cache.
                      Let’s learn about the global method cache first. Ruby uses the global
                  method cache to save a mapping between the receiver and implementer
                  classes, as shown in Table 6-1.

                  Table 6-1: An Example of What the Global Method Cache Might Contain
                  klass                              defined_class
                  Fixnum#times                       Integer#times
                  Object#puts                        BasicObject#puts
                  etc...                             etc...


                       The left column in Table 6-1, klass, shows the receiver class; this is the
                  class of the object you call a method on. The right column, defined_class,
                  records the result of the method lookup. This is the implementer class, or
                  the class that implements the method Ruby was looking for.
                       Let’s take the first row of Table 6-1 as an example; it reads Fixnum#times
                  and Integer#times. In the global method cache, this information means
                  that Ruby’s method lookup algorithm started to look for the times method
                  in the Fixnum class but actually found it in the Integer class. In a similar way,
                  the second row of Table 6-1 means that Ruby started to look for the puts
                  method in the Object class but actually found it in the BasicObject class.
                       The global method cache allows Ruby to skip the method lookup pro-
                  cess the next time your code calls a method listed in the first column of the
                  global cache. After your code has called Fixnum#times once, Ruby knows that
                  it can execute the Integer#times method, regardless of from where in your
                  program you call times.

142   Chapter 6                       Ruby Under a Microscope
                                     © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
The Inline Method Cache
Ruby uses another type of cache, called an inline method cache, to speed up
method lookup even more. The inline cache saves information alongside
the compiled YARV instructions that Ruby executes (see Figure 6-8).

putobject 10
send      <callinfo!mid:times, argc:0,
          block:block in <compiled>>                           Integer#times


Figure 6-8: The YARV instructions on the left should call the implementation of
Integer#times on the right.


     On the left side of this figure, we see the compiled YARV instructions
that correspond to the code 10.times do... end. First, putobject 10 pushes
the Fixnum object 10 onto YARV’s internal stack. This is the receiver of the
times method call. Next, send calls the times method, as indicated by the text
between the angle brackets.
     The rectangle on the right side of the figure represents the Integer#times
method, which Ruby found using its method lookup algorithm (after look-
ing up the times method among the Fixnum class and its superclasses). Ruby’s
inline cache enables it to save the mapping between the times method
call and the Integer#times implementation right in the YARV instructions.
Figure 6-9 shows how the inline cache might look.

putobject 10

send           Integer#times                                   Integer#times


Figure 6-9: The inline cache saves the result of method lookup next to the send
instruction that needs to call the method.

    If Ruby executes this line of code again, it will immediately execute
Integer#times without having to call the method lookup algorithm.


Clearing Ruby’s Method Caches
Because Ruby is a dynamic language, you can define new methods when
you like. In order for you to be able to do so, Ruby must clear the global and
inline method caches, because the results of method lookups might change.
For example, if we add a new definition of the times method to the Fixnum
or Integer classes, Ruby would need to call the new times method, not the
Integer#times method that it was previously using.
     In effect, whenever you create or remove (undefine) a method, include
a module into a class, or perform a similar action, Ruby clears the global
and inline method caches, forcing a new call to the method lookup code.
Ruby also clears the cache when you use refinements or employ other types



                      Ruby Under a Microscope            Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   143
                     © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                  of metaprogramming. In fact, clearing the cache happens quite frequently
                  in Ruby. The global and inline method caches might remain valid for only a
                  short time.

                  Including Two Modules into One Class
                  While Ruby’s method lookup algorithm may be simple, the code that it
                  uses to include modules is not. As we saw above, when you include a mod-
                  ule into a class, Ruby inserts a copy of the module into the class’s ancestor
                  chain. This means that if you include two modules, one after the other, the
                  second module appears first in the ancestor chain and is found first by Ruby’s
                  method lookup logic.
                       For example, suppose we include two modules into Mathematician, as
                  shown in Listing 6-6.

                  class Mathematician < Person
                    include Professor
                    include Employee
                  end

                  Listing 6-6: Including two modules into one class

                      Now Mathematician objects have methods from the Professor module, the
                  Employee module, and the Person class. But which methods does Ruby find
                  first and which methods override which?
                       Figures 6-10 and 6-11 show the order of precedence. Because we include
                  the Professor module first, Ruby inserts the included class corresponding
                  to the Professor module as a superclass first.

                                    RClass
                  Mathematician         super



                                                         RClass                        RClass
                                                             super                       super
                                                                             copy

                                                           Included                    Professor
                                    RClass                   class
                      Person            super


                  Figure 6-10: In Listing 6-6 we include the Professor module first.

                      Now, when we include the Employee module, the included class for the
                  Employee module is inserted above the included class for the Professor mod-
                  ule, as shown in Figure 6-11.




144   Chapter 6                          Ruby Under a Microscope
                                        © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                  RClass
Mathematician         super



                                       RClass                          RClass
                                          super                            super
                                                          copy

                                     Included class                     Employee
Included class    RClass              for Employee
for Professor         super




                  RClass
    Person            super


Figure 6-11: In Listing 6-6 we include the Employee module second, after including
Professor.


    Because Employee appears above Professor in the superclass chain, as
shown along the left side of Figure 6-11, methods from Employee override
methods from Professor, which in turn override methods from Person, the
actual superclass.

Including One Module into Another
Modules don’t allow you to specify superclasses. For example, we can’t write
the following:

module Professor < Employee
end

    But we can include one module into another, as shown in Listing 6-7.

module Professor
  include Employee
end

Listing 6-7: One module including another module

    What if we include Professor, a module with other modules included
into it, into Mathematician? Which methods will Ruby find first? As shown in
Figure 6-12, when we include Employee into Professor, Ruby creates a copy of
Employee and sets it as the superclass of Professor.




                      Ruby Under a Microscope           Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   145
                     © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                     Professor

                     RClass
                        super




                     RClass                        RClass
                        super                          super
                                        copy

                    Included class                    Employee
                     for Employee

                   Figure 6-12: When you include one module
                   into another, Ruby sets it as the superclass
                   of the target module.

                       Modules can’t have a superclass in your code, but they can inside Ruby
                   because Ruby represents modules with classes internally!
                       Finally, when we include Professor into Mathematician, Ruby iterates over
                   the two modules and inserts them both as superclasses of Mathematician, as
                   shown in Figure 6-13.


                       RClass         Included class
     Mathematician
                          super
                                      for Professor                Professor

                                        RClass                      RClass
                                           super                        super
                                                        copy



                                        RClass                      RClass                RClass
                                           super                        super               super
                                                        copy                       copy
                                         Included                 Included class          Employee
         Person
                       RClass            class #2                  for Employee
                          super        for Employee


     Figure 6-13: Including two modules into a class at the same time


                        Now Ruby will find the methods in Professor first and Employee second.

                   A Module#prepend Example
                   In Figure 6-2 we saw how Ruby includes a module into a class. Specifically,
                   we saw how Ruby inserts a copy of the module’s RClass structure into the
                   superclass chain for the target class, between the class and its superclass.

146   Chapter 6                           Ruby Under a Microscope
                                         © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
         Beginning with version 2.0, Ruby now allows you to “prepend” a mod-
    ule into a class. We’ll use the Mathematician class to explain, as shown in
    Listing 6-8.

    class Mathematician
u     attr_accessor :name
    end

  poincaré = Mathematician.new
  poincaré.name = "Henri Poincaré"
v p poincaré.name
   => "Henri Poincaré"

    Listing 6-8: A simple Ruby class with a name attribute

          First, we define the Mathematician class with just the single attribute name
    at u. Then, we create an instance of Mathematician, set its name, and display
    it at v.
          Now suppose we make all of our mathematicians professors by includ-
    ing the Professor module into the Mathematician class again, as shown at u in
    Listing 6-9.

    module Professor
    end

  class Mathematician
    attr_accessor :name
u   include Professor
  end

    Listing 6-9: Including the Professor module into the Mathematician class

         Figure 6-14 shows the superclass chain for Mathematician and Professor.

                       RClass
    Mathematician          super




    Included class     RClass
    for Professor          super




                       RClass
        Object             super


    Figure 6-14: Professor is a superclass
    of Mathematician.


                          Ruby Under a Microscope            Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   147
                         © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                           If we decide to display the title Prof. in front of each mathematician’s
                      name, we can just add that behavior to the Mathematician class, as shown in
                      Listing 6-10.

                      module Professor
                      end

                    class Mathematician
                      attr_writer :name
                      include Professor
                  u   def name
                        "Prof. #{@name}"
                      end
                    end

                      Listing 6-10: An ugly way to display the Prof. title before each mathematician’s name

                           But this is a very ugly solution: The Mathematician class has to do the work
                      of displaying the professor title at u. What if other classes include Professor?
                      Shouldn’t they display the Prof. title also? If Mathematician contains the code
                      for showing Prof., then any other classes that include Professor would be
                      missing this code.
                           It makes more sense to include the code for displaying the title in
                      the Professor module, as shown in Listing 6-11. This way every class that
                      includes Professor will be able to display the title Prof. along with its
                      class name.

                      module Professor
                  u     def name
                          "Prof. #{super}"
                        end
                      end

                    class Mathematician
                      attr_accessor :name
                  v   include Professor
                    end

                    poincaré = Mathematician.new
                    poincaré.name = "Henri Poincaré"
                  w p poincaré.name
                     => "Henri Poincaré"

                      Listing 6-11: How can we get Ruby to call the module’s name method?

                           At u we define a name method inside Professor that will display the Prof.
                      title before the actual name (assuming that name is defined in a superclass).
                      At v we include Professor into Mathematician. Finally, at w we call the name
                      method, but we get the name Henri Poincaré without the Prof. title. What
                      went wrong?



148   Chapter 6                             Ruby Under a Microscope
                                           © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
       The problem, as shown in Figure 6-14, is that Professor is a super-
  class of Mathematician, not the other way around. This means when I
  call poincaré.name at w in Listing 6-11, Ruby finds the name method from
  Mathematician, not from Professor. Figure 6-15 shows visually what Ruby’s
  method lookup algorithm finds when I call poincaré.name.

                       RClass
  Mathematician            super              attr_accessor :name




                       RClass                 def name
   Included class
                                                "Prof. #{super}"
   for Professor           super
                                              end




                       RClass
      Object               super


  Figure 6-15: Ruby calls the attr_accessor method before finding
  the name method from Professor.

      When we call name at w in Listing 6-11, Ruby finds the first name method
  that it sees in the superclass chain starting from the top and moving down.
  As you can see in Figure 6-15, the first name method is the simple attr_accessor
  method in Mathematician.
      However, if we prepend Professor instead of including it, we get the
  behavior we were hoping for, as shown in Listing 6-12.

  module Professor
    def name
      "Prof. #{super}"
    end
  end

  class Mathematician
    attr_accessor :name
u   prepend Professor
  end

  poincaré = Mathematician.new
  poincaré.name = "Henri Poincaré"
v p poincaré.name
   => "Prof. Henri Poincaré"

  Listing 6-12: Using prepend, Ruby finds the module’s name method first.

       The only difference here is the use of prepend at u.

                        Ruby Under a Microscope            Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   149
                       © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                  How Ruby Implements Module#prepend
                  When you prepend a module to a class, Ruby places it before the class in
                  the superclass chain, as shown in Figure 6-16.

                                      RClass               def name
                  Included class
                                                             "Prof. #{super}"
                  for Professor          super
                                                           end




                                      RClass
                  Mathematician          super
                                                           attr_accessor :name




                                      RClass
                      Object             super


                  Figure 6-16: Using prepend, Ruby places the module before the
                  target class in the superclass chain.

                       But there is something odd here. When we call name on a mathematician
                  object, how does Ruby find the module’s method? That is, at v in Listing 6-12,
                  we’re calling name on the Mathematician class, not on the Professor module.
                  Ruby should find the simple attr_accessor method, not the version from the
                  module, but that’s not the case. Does Ruby look backward up the superclass
                  chain to find the module? If so, how does it do this when the super pointers
                  point down?
                       The secret is that internally Ruby uses a trick to make it seem as if
                  Mathematician is the superclass of Professor when it’s not, as shown in Figure 6-17.
                  Prepending a module is like including a module. Mathematician is at the top
                  of the superclass chain, and moving down the chain, we see that Ruby still
                  sets the included class for Professor to be the superclass of Mathematician.
                       But below Professor in Figure 6-17 we see something new, the origin class
                  for Mathematician. This is a new copy of Mathematician that Ruby creates to
                  make prepend work.
                       When you prepend a module, Ruby creates a copy of the target class
                  (called the origin class internally) and sets it as the superclass of the prepended
                  module. Ruby uses the origin pointer that we saw in the rb_classext_struct
                  structure in Figures 6-1 and 6-2 to track this new origin copy of the class.
                  In addition, Ruby moves all of the methods from the original class to the
                  origin class, which means that those methods may now be overridden by
                  methods with the same name in the prepended module. In Figure 6-17 you
                  can see that Ruby moved the attr_accessor method down from Mathematician
                  to the origin class.



150   Chapter 6                         Ruby Under a Microscope
                                       © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                         RClass

    Mathematician            origin


                             super




                         RClass                def name
    Included class
                                                 "Prof. #{super}"
    for Professor            super
                                               end




    Mathematician        RClass
                                               attr_accessor :name
     “origin” class          super




                         RClass
        Object               super


    Figure 6-17: Ruby creates a copy of the target class and sets it as
    the superclass of the prepended module.




    Experiment 6-1: Modifying a Module After
    Including It
    Following a suggestion by Xavier Noria, this experiment will explore what
    happens when you modify a module once it’s been included into a class.
    We’ll use the same Mathematician class and the Professor module but with dif-
    ferent methods, as shown in Listing 6-13.

    module Professor
      def lectures; end
    end

  class Mathematician
u   attr_accessor :first_name
    attr_accessor :last_name
v   include Professor
  end

    Listing 6-13: Another example of including a module into a class




                          Ruby Under a Microscope             Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   151
                         © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                          This time the Mathematician class contains the accessor methods at u for
                      @first_name and @last_name, and we’ve included the Professor module again
                      at v. If we inspect the methods of a mathematician object, as shown in
                      Listing 6-14, we should see the attribute methods, such as first_name= and
                      the lectures method from Professor.

                      fermat = Mathematician.new
                      fermat.first_name = 'Pierre'
                      fermat.last_name = 'de Fermat'

                      p fermat.methods.sort
                       => [ ... :first_name, :first_name=, ... :last_name, :last_name=, :lectures ... ]

                      Listing 6-14: Inspecting the methods of a mathematician object

                          No surprise; we see all the methods.

                      Classes See Methods Added to a Module Later
                      Now let’s add some new methods to the Professor module after including it
                      into the Mathematician class. Does Ruby know that the new methods should
                      be added to Mathematician as well? Let’s find out by running Listing 6-15
                      right after Listing 6-14 finishes.

                      module Professor
                        def primary_classroom; end
                      end

                      p fermat.methods.sort
                  u    => [ ... :first_name, :first_name=, ... :last_name, :last_name=, :lectures,
                      ... :primary_classroom, ... ]

                      Listing 6-15: Adding a new method to Professor after including it into Mathematician

                          As you can see, at u we get all the methods, including the new
                      primary_classroom method that was added to Professor after it was included
                      into Mathematician. No surprise here either. Ruby is one step ahead of us.

                      Classes Don’t See Submodules Included Later
                      Now for one more test. What if we reopen the Professor module and include
                      yet another module into it using Listing 6-16?

                      module Employee
                        def hire_date; end
                      end

                      module Professor
                        include Employee
                      end

                      Listing 6-16: Including a new module into Professor after it was included into Mathematician

152   Chapter 6                              Ruby Under a Microscope
                                            © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
   This is getting confusing, so let’s review what we did in Listings 6-13
and 6-16:

•     In Listing 6-13 we included the Professor module into the Mathematician
      class.
•     Then, in Listing 6-16 we included the Employee module into the Professor
      module. Therefore, the methods of the Employee module should now be
      available on a mathematician object.

      Let’s see whether Ruby works as expected:

p fermat.methods.sort
 => [ ... :first_name, :first_name=, ... :last_name, :last_name=, :lectures ... ]

    It didn’t work! The hire_date method is not available in the fermat object.
Including a module into a module already included into a class does not
affect that class.
    As we’ve learned how Ruby implements modules, this fact shouldn’t
be too hard to understand. Including Employee into Professor changes the
Professor module, not the copy of Professor that Ruby created when we
included it into Mathematician, as shown in Figure 6-18.
Mathematician

    RClass
      super

                                            Professor

    RClass           (copied earlier)      RClass
      super                                    super

Included class
for Professor
                                            RClass                          RClass
                                               super                           super
                                                               copy

                                          Included class                     Employee
                                           for Employee

Figure 6-18: The Employee module is included into the original Professor module,
not the included copy used by Mathematician.


Included Classes Share the Method Table with the Original Module
But what about the primary_classroom method we added in Listing 6-15? How
was Ruby able to include the primary_classroom method into Mathematician
even though we added it to Professor after we included Professor into
Mathematician? Figure 6-18 shows that Ruby created a copy of the Professor
module before we added the new method to it. But how does the fermat
object get the new method?
                     Ruby Under a Microscope            Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   153
                    © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                        As it turns out, when you include a module, Ruby copies the RClass
                    structure, not the underlying method table, as shown in Figure 6-19.

                                        RClass
                    Mathematician          super               Included
                                                                                                   Professor
                                                                 class

                                                             RClass                                RClass
                                                                super                                super
                                                                m_tbl             copy               m_tbl


                                        RClass
                      Superclass           super
                                                                                                    lectures

                                                                                            primary_classroom


                                                                                               Method table
                                                                                               (not copied)

                    Figure 6-19: Ruby doesn’t copy the method table when you include a module.

                        Ruby doesn’t copy the method table for Professor. Instead, it simply sets
                    m_tbl in the new copy of Professor, the “included class,” to point to the same
                    method table. This means that modifying the method table by reopening
                    the module and adding new methods will change both the module and any
                    classes into which it was already included.



                                A Close Look at How Ruby Copie s Module s

                    By looking at Ruby’s C source code directly, you’ll gain a precise understanding
                    of how Ruby copies modules when you include them and why Ruby behaves as
                    you’ll see in this experiment. You’ll find the C function that Ruby uses to make a
                    copy of a module in the class.c file. Listing 6-17 shows a portion of the function
                    rb_include_class_new.

                    VALUE
                  u rb_include_class_new(VALUE module, VALUE super)
                    {
                  v     VALUE klass = class_alloc(T_ICLASS, rb_cClass);
                        --snip--
                  w     RCLASS_IV_TBL(klass) = RCLASS_IV_TBL(module);
                        RCLASS_CONST_TBL(klass) = RCLASS_CONST_TBL(module);
                  x     RCLASS_M_TBL(klass) = RCLASS_M_TBL(RCLASS_ORIGIN(module));
                  y     RCLASS_SUPER(klass) = super;
                        --snip--
                        return (VALUE)klass;
                    }


                    Listing 6-17: A portion of the rb_include_class_new C function, from class.c




154   Chapter 6                               Ruby Under a Microscope
                                             © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
             At u Ruby passes in module (the target module to copy) and super (the super-
       class to use for the new copy of module). By specifying a particular superclass, Ruby
       inserts the new copy into the superclass chain at a particular place. If you search
       class.c for rb_include_class_new, you’ll find that Ruby calls it from another C function,
       include_modules_at, which handles the complex internal logic that Ruby uses to
       include modules.
             At v Ruby calls class_alloc to create a new RClass structure and saves a refer-
       ence to it in klass. Notice the first parameter to class_alloc is the value T_ICLASS,
       which identifies the new class as an included class. Ruby uses T_ICLASS throughout its
       C source code when dealing with included classes.
             At w Ruby copies a series of pointers from the original module’s RClass structure
       over to the new copy using three C macros that operate on RClass.

       •    RCLASS_IV_TBL gets or sets a pointer to the instance variable table.

       •    RCLASS_CONST_TBL gets or sets a pointer to the constant variable table.

       •    RCLASS_M_TBL gets or sets a pointer to the method table.

            For example, RCLASS_IV_TBL(klass) = RCLASS_IV_TBL(module) sets the instance
       variable table pointer in klass (the new copy) to the instance variable pointer from
       module (the target module to copy). Now klass and module use the same instance
       variables. In the same way, klass shares constant and method tables with module.
       Because they share the same method table, adding a new method to module also
       adds it to klass. This explains the behavior we saw in Experiment 6-1: Adding a
       method to a module also adds it to each class that includes that module.
            Also note at x Ruby uses RCLASS_ORIGIN(module), not module. Normally
       RCLASS_ORIGIN(module) is the same as module; however, if you have earlier used
       prepend in module, then RCLASS_ORIGIN(module) instead returns the origin class for
       module. Recall that when you call Module#prepend, Ruby makes a copy (the origin
       class) of the target module and inserts the copy into the superclass chain. By using
       RCLASS_ORIGIN(module), Ruby gets the original module’s method table, even if you
       prepended it with a different module.
            Finally, at y Ruby sets the superclass pointer of klass to the specified superclass
       and returns it.




Constant Lookup
       We’ve learned about Ruby’s method lookup algorithm and how it searches
       through the superclass chain to find the right method to call. Now we’ll
       turn our attention to a related process: Ruby’s constant lookup algorithm,
       or the process Ruby uses to find a constant value that you refer to in your code.
            Clearly method lookup is central to the language, but why study con-
       stant lookup? As Ruby developers, we don’t use constants very often in our
       code—certainly not as often as we use classes, modules, variables, and blocks.


                              Ruby Under a Microscope            Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   155
                             © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                           One reason is that constants, like modules and classes, are central to
                      the way Ruby works internally and to the way we use Ruby. Whenever you
                      define a module or class, you also define a constant. And whenever you refer
                      to or use a module or class, Ruby has to look up the corresponding constant.
                           The second reason has to do with the way Ruby finds a constant that
                      you refer to in your code. As you may know, Ruby finds constants defined
                      in a superclass, but it also finds constants in the surrounding namespace
                      or syntactical scope of your program. Studying how Ruby handles syntacti-
                      cal scope leads us to some important discoveries about how Ruby works
                      internally.
                           Let’s begin by reviewing how constants work in Ruby.

                      Finding a Constant in a Superclass
                      One way that Ruby searches for the definition of a constant you refer to
                      is by using the superclass chain just as it would look for a method defini-
                      tion. Listing 6-18 shows an example of one class finding a constant in its
                      superclass.

                      class MyClass
                  u     SOME_CONSTANT = "Some value..."
                      end

                  v class Subclass < MyClass
                      p SOME_CONSTANT
                    end

                      Listing 6-18: Ruby finds constants you define in a superclass.

                          In Listing 6-18 we define MyClass with a single constant, SOME_CONSTANT
                      at u. Then we create Subclass and set MyClass as a superclass at v. When we
                      print the value of SOME_CONSTANT, Ruby uses the same algorithm it uses to find
                      a method, as shown in Figure 6-20.

                           RClass: MyClass
                                     constants:
                                   SOME_CONSTANT                class MyClass
                                                                  SOME_CONSTANT = "Some value..."
                                       etc...                   end




                              RClass: Subclass
                                                                class Subclass < MyClass
                                     superclass:
                                                                  p SOME_CONSTANT
                                      MyClass                   end



                      Figure 6-20: Ruby searches for constants using the superclass chain,
                      just as it does with methods.

156   Chapter 6                              Ruby Under a Microscope
                                            © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
       Here, on the right, you see the code from Listing 6-18 and, on the left,
  the RClass structures that correspond to each of the two classes we created.
  At the top left of the figure, you see MyClass, which contains the value of
  SOME_CONSTANT in its constants table. Below that is Subclass. When we refer
  to SOME_CONSTANT from inside Subclass, Ruby uses the super pointer to find
  MyClass and the value of SOME_CONSTANT.


  How Does Ruby Find a Constant in the Parent Namespace?
  Listing 6-19 shows another way to define a constant.

u module Namespace
v SOME_CONSTANT = "Some value..."
w class Subclass
x     p SOME_CONSTANT
    end
  end

  Listing 6-19: Using a constant defined in the surrounding namespace

      Using idiomatic Ruby style, we create a module called Namespace at u.
  Then, inside this module, we declare the same SOME_CONSTANT value at v.
  Next, we declare Subclass inside Namespace at w, and we’re able to refer to
  and print the value of SOME_CONSTANT, just as in Listing 6-18.
      But how does Ruby find SOME_CONSTANT in Listing 6-19 when we display it
  at x? Figure 6-21 shows the problem.

    RClass: Namespace module
              constants:
            SOME_CONSTANT
                etc...
                                           module Namespace

                                             SOME_CONSTANT = "Some value..."

                                             class Subclass
                  ?                            p SOME_CONSTANT
                                             end

                                           end
       RClass: Subclass
              superclass:
                Object



  Figure 6-21: How does Ruby find constants in the surrounding namespace?




                          Ruby Under a Microscope        Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   157
                         © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                       On the left side of this figure are two RClass structures, one for the
                  Namespace module and one for Subclass. Notice that Namespace is not a super-
                  class of Subclass; the super pointer in Subclass refers to the Object class, Ruby’s
                  default superclass. Then how does Ruby find SOME_CONSTANT when we refer to
                  it inside of Subclass? Somehow Ruby allows you to search up the “namespace
                  chain” to find constants. This behavior is called using lexical scope to find
                  a constant.


     Lexical Scope in Ruby
                  Lexical scope refers to a section of code within the syntactical structure of
                  your program, rather than within the superclass hierarchy or some other
                  scheme. For example, suppose we use the class keyword to define MyClass,
                  as shown in Listing 6-20.

                  class MyClass
                    SOME_CONSTANT = "Some value..."
                  end

                  Listing 6-20: Defining a class with the class keyword

                       This code tells Ruby to create a new copy of the RClass structure, but
                  it also defines a new scope or syntactical section of your program. This
                  is the area between the class and end keywords, as shown with shading in
                  Figure 6-22.
                  class MyClass


                    SOME_CONSTANT = "Some value..."


                  end

                  Figure 6-22: The class keyword creates
                  a class and a new lexical scope.

                      Think of your Ruby program as a series of scopes, one for each module
                  or class that you create and another for the default, top-level lexical scope.
                  To keep track of where this new scope lies inside your program’s lexical
                  structure, Ruby attaches a couple of pointers to the YARV instruction snip-
                  pet corresponding to the code it compiles inside this new scope, as shown
                  in Figure 6-23.




158   Chapter 6                          Ruby Under a Microscope
                                        © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                              Lexical Scope:

                                 top level
class MyClass
                                                    RClass: MyClass
    SOME_CONSTANT =               nd_next
                                                           constants:
      "Some value..."             nd_clss
                                                        SOME_CONSTANT

end                                                         etc...


Figure 6-23: For each snippet of compiled code, Ruby uses pointers to track
the parent lexical scope and the current class or module.

    This figure shows the lexical scope information attached to the right
side of the Ruby code. There are two important values here:

•     First, the nd_next pointer is set to the parent or surrounding lexical
      scope—the default or top-level scope in this case.
•     Next, the nd_clss pointer indicates which Ruby class or module corre-
      sponds to this scope. In this example, because we just defined MyClass
      using the class keyword, Ruby sets the nd_clss pointer to the RClass
      structure corresponding to MyClass.

Creating a Constant for a New Class or Module
Whenever you create a class or module, Ruby automatically creates a corre-
sponding constant and saves it in the class or module for the parent lexical
scope.
    Let’s return to the “namespace” example from Listing 6-19. Figure 6-24
shows what Ruby does internally when you create MyClass inside Namespace.

                              Lexical Scope:

                                 top level
module Namespace
                                                    RClass: Namespace
    SOME_CONSTANT =               nd_next           module
      "Some value..."                                      constants:
                                  nd_clss
    class MyClass                                       SOME_CONSTANT
    end
                                                            MyClass
end




                                                      RClass: MyClass


Figure 6-24: When you declare a new class, Ruby creates a new RClass
structure and defines a new constant set to the new class’s name.



                         Ruby Under a Microscope        Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   159
                        © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                        The dashed arrows in this figure show what actions Ruby takes when
                    you create a new class or module:

                    •     First, Ruby creates a new RClass structure for the new module or class,
                          as shown at the bottom.
                    •     Then, Ruby creates a new constant using the new module or class name
                          and saves it inside the class corresponding to the parent lexical scope.
                          Ruby sets the value of the new constant to be a reference or pointer to
                          the new RClass structure. In Figure 6-24 you can see that the MyClass
                          constant appears in the constants table for the Namespace module.

                          The new class also gets its own new lexical scope, as shown in Figure 6-25.

                                                   Lexical Scope:
                                                      top level
                    module Namespace
                                                                          RClass: Namespace
                                                       nd_next            module
                        SOME_CONSTANT =
                                                                                  constants:
                          "Some value..."              nd_clss
                                                                                SOME_CONSTANT

                                                                                   MyClass

                        class MyClass

                                                       nd_next

                                                       nd_clss                RClass: MyClass

                      end
                    end

                    Figure 6-25: A new class also gets its own lexical scope, shown here as the second
                    shaded rectangle.

                         This figure shows a new shaded rectangle for the new scope. Its nd_clss
                    pointer is set to the new RClass structure for MyClass, and its nd_next pointer
                    is set to the parent scope that corresponds to the Namespace module.

                    Finding a Constant in the Parent Namespace Using Lexical Scope
                    In Listing 6-21 let’s return to the example from Listing 6-19, which prints
                    the value of SOME_CONSTANT.

                    module Namespace
                      SOME_CONSTANT = "Some value..."
                      class Subclass
                  u     p SOME_CONSTANT
                      end
                    end

                    Listing 6-21: Finding a constant in the parent lexical scope (repeated from Listing 6-19)


160   Chapter 6                              Ruby Under a Microscope
                                            © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
    In Figure 6-20 we saw how Ruby iterates over super pointers to find a
constant from a superclass. But in Figure 6-21 we saw that Ruby couldn’t use
super pointers to find SOME_CONSTANT in this example because Namespace is not a
superclass of MyClass. Instead, as Figure 6-26 shows, Ruby can use the nd_next
pointers to iterate up through your program’s lexical scopes in search of
constant values.

                                Lexical Scope:

                                   top level
module Namespace
                                                     RClass: Namespace
    SOME_CONSTANT =                 nd_next          module
      "Some value..."                                        constants:
                                    nd_clss
                                                          SOME_CONSTANT

                                                              MyClass


    class MyClass

                                    nd_next
      p SOME_CONSTANT
                                    nd_clss             RClass: MyClass

  end
end

Figure 6-26: Ruby can find SOME_CONSTANT in the parent lexical scope using the
nd_next and nd_clss pointers.


   By following the arrows in this figure, you can see how the p SOME_CONSTANT
command at u in Listing 6-21 works:

•     First, Ruby looks for the value of SOME_CONSTANT in the current
      scope’s class, MyClass. In Figure 6-26 the current scope contains the
      p SOME_CONSTANT code. You can see how Ruby finds the current scope’s
      class on the right using the nd_clss pointer. Here, MyClass has nothing
      in its constants table.
•     Next, Ruby finds the parent lexical scope using the nd_next pointer,
      moving up Figure 6-26.
•     Ruby repeats the process, searching the current scope’s class using
      the nd_clss pointer. This time the current scope’s class is the Namespace
      module, at the top right of Figure 6-26. Now Ruby finds SOME_CONSTANT
      in Namespace’s constants table.




                         Ruby Under a Microscope        Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   161
                        © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                      Ruby’s Constant Lookup Algorithm
                      The flowchart in Figure 6-27 summarizes how Ruby iterates over the lexical
                      scope chain while looking for constants.

                                set cref to
                              current lexical
                                   scope




                               look through
                              constant table
                              for cref’s class




                                                           not
                                                         found
                                 constant                             set cref parent
                                  found?                               lexical scope



                                       found



                                   done



                      Figure 6-27: Part of Ruby’s constant lookup algorithm

                           Notice that this figure is very similar to Figure 6-3. Ruby iterates over
                      the linked list formed by the nd_next pointers in each lexical scope while
                      looking for a constant, just as it iterates over the super pointers while look-
                      ing for a method. Ruby uses superclasses to find methods and parent lexical
                      scopes to find constants.
                           However, this is just part of Ruby’s constant lookup algorithm. As we saw
                      earlier in Figure 6-20, Ruby also looks through superclasses for constants.


                      Experiment 6-2: Which Constant Will Ruby Find First?
                      We’ve just learned that Ruby iterates over a linked list of lexical scopes in
                      order to look up constant values. However, we saw earlier in Figure 6-20
                      that Ruby also uses the superclass chain to look up constants. Let’s use
                      Listing 6-22 to see how this works in more detail.

                      class Superclass
                  u     FIND_ME = "Found in Superclass"
                      end




162   Chapter 6                                  Ruby Under a Microscope
                                                © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
    module ParentLexicalScope
v     FIND_ME = "Found in ParentLexicalScope"

      module ChildLexicalScope

        class Subclass < Superclass
          p FIND_ME
        end

      end
    end

    Listing 6-22: Does Ruby search the lexical scope chain first? Or does it search the super-
    class chain first? (find-constant.rb)

        Notice here that I’ve defined the constant FIND_ME twice—at u and at v.
    Which constant will Ruby find first? Will Ruby first iterate over the lexical
    scope chain and find the constant at v? Or will it iterate over the superclass
    chain and find the constant value at u?
        Let’s find out! When we run Listing 6-22, we get the following:

    $ ruby find-constant.rb
    "Found in ParentLexicalScope"

         You can see that Ruby looks through the lexical scope chain first.
         Now let’s comment out the second definition at v in Listing 6-22 and
    try the experiment again:

    module ParentLexicalScope
v     #FIND_ME = "Found in ParentLexicalScope"

        When we run the modified Listing 6-22, we get the following:

    $ ruby find-constant.rb
    "Found in Superclass"

        Because now there is only one definition of FIND_ME, Ruby finds it by iter-
    ating over the superclass chain.

    Ruby’s Actual Constant Lookup Algorithm
    Unfortunately, things aren’t quite so simple; there are some other quirks in
    Ruby’s behavior with regard to constants. Figure 6-28 is a simplified flow-
    chart showing Ruby’s entire constant lookup algorithm.




                          Ruby Under a Microscope            Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   163
                         © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
                      search through
                    lexical scope chain



                                           for each scope’s
                                            class, check for
                                               autoload



                      search through
                     superclass chain




                                          for each superclass,
                                           check for autoload




                           call
                      const_missing


                  Figure 6-28: A high-level summary of Ruby’s
                  constant lookup algorithm

                       At the top, you can see that Ruby begins by iterating up the lexical
                  scope chain, as we saw in Listing 6-22. Ruby always finds constants, includ-
                  ing classes or modules, that are defined in a parent lexical scope. However,
                  as Ruby iterates up the scope chain, it looks to see whether you used the
                  autoload keyword, which instructs it to open and read in a new code file if
                  a given constant is undefined. (The Rails framework uses autoload to allow
                  you to load models, controllers, and other Rails objects without having to
                  use require explicitly.)
                       If Ruby loops through the entire lexical scope chain without finding
                  the given constant or a corresponding autoload keyword, it then iterates
                  up the superclass chain, as we saw in Listing 6-18. This allows you to load
                  constants defined in a superclass. Ruby once again honors any autoload key-
                  word that might exist in any of those superclasses, loading an additional file
                  if necessary.
                       Finally, if all else fails and the constant still isn’t found, Ruby calls the
                  const_missing method on your module if you provided one.




164   Chapter 6                             Ruby Under a Microscope
                                           © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
Summary
      In this chapter we’ve learned two very different ways to look at your Ruby
      program. On the one hand, you can organize your code by class and super-
      class, and on the other, you can organize it by lexical scope. We saw how
      internally Ruby uses different sets of C pointers to keep track of these two
      trees as it executes your program. The super pointers found in the RClass
      structures form the superclass tree, while the nd_next pointers from the lexi-
      cal scope structures form the namespace or lexical scope tree.
           We studied two important algorithms that use these trees: how Ruby
      looks up methods and constants. Ruby uses the class tree to find the methods
      that your code (and Ruby’s own internal code) calls. Similarly, Ruby uses
      both the lexical scope tree and the superclass hierarchy to find constants
      that your code refers to. Understanding the method and constant lookup
      algorithms is essential. They allow you to design your program and organize
      your code using these two trees in a way that is appropriate for the problem
      you are trying to solve.
           At first glance, these two organizational schemes seem completely
      orthogonal, but in fact they are closely related by the way Ruby’s classes
      behave. When you create a class or module, you add both to the superclass
      and lexical scope hierarchy, and when you refer to a class or superclass, you
      instruct Ruby to look up a particular constant using the lexical scope tree.




                         Ruby Under a Microscope      Method Lookup and Constant Lookup   165
                        © 2013 by Pat Shaughnessy
