                             The Incredible Plate Tectonics Comic:
                             The Adventures of Geo, Vol. 1
                             by Kanani K.M. Lee and Adam Wallenta
                             isbn 978-1-59327-549-5



                             Common Core State Standards Alignment



Grade: 6    Language       CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.6.3,3a,4,4a,4c,4d,5,5a,5c,6

3    Use knowledge of language and its conventions when writing, speaking, reading, or listening.
3a   Vary sentence patterns for meaning, reader/listener interest, and style.
4    Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning words and phrases based on grade 6
     reading and content, choosing flexibly from a range of strategies.
4a   Use context (e.g., the overall meaning of a sentence or paragraph; a word’s position or function in a sentence)
     as a clue to the meaning of a word or phrase.
4c   Consult reference materials (e.g., dictionaries, glossaries, thesauruses), both print and digital, to find the
     pronunciation of a word or determine or clarify its precise meaning or its part of speech.
4d   Verify the preliminary determination of the meaning of a word or phrase (e.g., by checking the inferred
     meaning in context or in a dictionary).
5    Demonstrate understanding of figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in word meanings.
5a   Interpret figures of speech (e.g., personification) in context
5c   Distinguish among the connotations (associations) of words with similar denotations (definitions) (e.g., stingy,
     scrimping, economical, unwasteful, thrifty).
6    Acquire and use accurately grade-appropriate general academic and domain-specific words and phrases;
     gather vocabulary knowledge when considering a word or phrase important to comprehension or expression.




Grade: 6    Reading: Literature        CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.6.1,2,3,4,5,6,9,10

1    Cite textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as well as inferences drawn from
     the text.
2    Determine a theme or central idea of a text and how it is conveyed through particular details; provide a
     summary of the text distinct from personal opinions or judgments.
3    Describe how a particular story’s or drama’s plot unfolds in a series of episodes as well as how the characters
     respond or change as the plot moves toward a resolution.
4    Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including figurative and connotative
     meanings; analyze the impact of a specific word choice on meaning and tone
5    Analyze how a particular sentence, chapter, scene, or stanza fits into the overall structure of a text and
     contributes to the development of the theme, setting, or plot.
6    Explain how an author develops the point of view of the narrator or speaker in a text.
9    Compare and contrast texts in different forms or genres (e.g., stories and poems; historical novels and fantasy
     stories) in terms of their approaches to similar themes and topics.
10   By the end of the year, read and comprehend literature, including stories, dramas, and poems, in the grades
     6–8 text complexity band proficiently, with scaffolding as needed at the high end of the range.




           No Starch Press | www.nostarch.com | info@nostarch.com
     The Incredible Plate Tectonics Comic: The Adventures of Geo, Vol. 1 : Common Core State Standards Alignment 1
Grade: 6-8    Science & Technical Subjects           CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RST.6-8.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10

1    Cite specific textual evidence to support analysis of science and technical texts.
2    Determine the central ideas or conclusions of a text; provide an accurate summary of the text distinct from
     prior knowledge or opinions.
3    Follow precisely a multistep procedure when carrying out experiments, taking measurements, or performing
     technical tasks.
4    Determine the meaning of symbols, key terms, and other domain-specific words and phrases as they are used
     in a specific scientific or technical context relevant to grades 6–8 texts and topics.
5    Analyze the structure an author uses to organize a text, including how the major sections contribute to the
     whole and to an understanding of the topic.
6    Analyze the author’s purpose in providing an explanation, describing a procedure, or discussing an
     experiment in a text.
7    Integrate quantitative or technical information expressed in words in a text with a version of that information
     expressed visually (e.g., in a flowchart, diagram, model, graph, or table).
8    Distinguish among facts, reasoned judgment based on research findings, and speculation in a text.
9    Compare and contrast the information gained from experiments, simulations, video, or multimedia sources
     with that gained from reading a text on the same topic.
10   By the end of grade 8, read and comprehend science/technical texts in the grades 6–8 text complexity band
     independently and proficiently.


Grade: 6     Speaking & Listening        CCSS.ELA-Literacy.SL.6.1,1a,1b,1c,1d,2,3,4,5,6

1    Engage effectively in a range of collaborative discussions (one-on-one, in groups, and teacher-led) with
     diverse partners on grade 6 topics, texts, and issues, building on others’ ideas and expressing their own
     clearly.
1a   Come to discussions prepared, having read or studied required material; explicitly draw on that preparation
     by referring to evidence on the topic, text, or issue to probe and reflect on ideas under discussion.
1b   Follow rules for collegial discussions, set specific goals and deadlines, and define individual roles as needed.
1c   Pose and respond to specific questions with elaboration and detail by making comments that contribute to
     the topic, text, or issue under discussion.
1d   Review the key ideas expressed and demonstrate understanding of multiple perspectives through reflection
     and paraphrasing.
2    Interpret information presented in diverse media and formats (e.g., visually, quantitatively, orally) and explain
     how it contributes to a topic, text, or issue under study.
3    Delineate a speaker’s argument and specific claims, distinguishing claims that are supported by reasons and
     evidence from claims that are not.
4    Present claims and findings, sequencing ideas logically and using pertinent descriptions, facts, and details to
     accentuate main ideas or themes; use appropriate eye contact, adequate volume, and clear pronunciation.
5    Include multimedia components (e.g., graphics, images, music, sound) and visual displays in presentations to
     clarify information.
6    Adapt speech to a variety of contexts and tasks, demonstrating command of formal English when indicated or
     appropriate. (See grade 6 Language standards 1 and 3 here for specific expectations.)




           No Starch Press | www.nostarch.com | info@nostarch.com
     The Incredible Plate Tectonics Comic: The Adventures of Geo, Vol. 1 : Common Core State Standards Alignment 2
Grade: 6    Writing     CCSS.ELA-Literacy.W.6.2,2a,2b,2d,2f,4,6,8,9,10

2    Write informative/explanatory texts to examine a topic and convey ideas, concepts, and information through
     the selection, organization, and analysis of relevant content.
2a   Introduce a topic; organize ideas, concepts, and information, using strategies such as definition, classification,
     comparison/contrast, and cause/effect; include formatting (e.g., headings), graphics (e.g., charts, tables), and
     multimedia when useful to aiding comprehension.
2b   Develop the topic with relevant facts, definitions, concrete details, quotations, or other information and
     examples.
2d   Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to inform about or explain the topic.
2f   Provide a concluding statement or section that follows from the information or explanation presented.
4    Produce clear and coherent writing in which the development, organization, and style are appropriate to task,
     purpose, and audience. (Grade-specific expectations for writing types are defined in standards 1–3 above.)
6    Use technology, including the Internet, to produce and publish writing as well as to interact and collaborate
     with others; demonstrate sufficient command of keyboarding skills to type a minimum of three pages in a
     single sitting.
8    Gather relevant information from multiple print and digital sources; assess the credibility of each source;
     and quote or paraphrase the data and conclusions of others while avoiding plagiarism and providing basic
     bibliographic information for sources.
9    Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research.
10   Write routinely over extended time frames (time for research, reflection, and revision) and shorter time frames
     (a single sitting or a day or two) for a range of discipline-specific tasks, purposes, and audiences.




           No Starch Press | www.nostarch.com | info@nostarch.com
     The Incredible Plate Tectonics Comic: The Adventures of Geo, Vol. 1 : Common Core State Standards Alignment 3
