/AB=>:756B4=@
7<G=C @47@AB075AB3>

B6@=C563;0322323:31


:32B6/BA6 C530CBE7B6
                    a blinking pattern on three LEDs. Your mission, should you choose
                    to accept it, is to build and program a stoplight for a busy hallway in
                    your house (see Figure 2-1).

FIGURE 2-1:
 The completed
Stoplight project




                    M AT E R I A L S TO G AT H E R
                    The materials in this project are all pretty simple. All of the electronic
                    parts are standard in the SparkFun Inventor’s Kit, except for the ones
                    marked with an asterisk (*). If you’re using your own kit or piecing
                    together parts yourself, see the following parts list. Figure 2-2 shows
                    all of the parts used in this project.

                    Electronic Parts
                    x   One SparkFun RedBoard (DEV-13975), Arduino Uno (DEV-11021),
                         or any other Arduino-compatible board
                    x   One USB Mini-B cable (CAB-11301 or your board’s USB cable;
                         not shown)
                    x   One solderless breadboard (PRT-12002)
                    x   One red LED, one yellow LED, and one green LED (COM-12062)
                    x   Three 330 Ω resistors (COM-08377, or COM-11507 for a pack of 20)
                    x   Male-to-male jumper wires (PRT-11026)
                    x   Male-to-female jumper wires (PRT-09140*)
                    x   (Optional) One 4 AA battery holder (PRT-09835*; not shown)




                                         °
                                     




                                                                
                                                                                   FIGURE 2-2:
                                                                                   Components for the
                                                                                   Stoplight




Other Materials and Tools
If you want to build an enclosure like the one in Figure 2-1 or follow             NOTE
the suggestions in “Going Further” on page 64, you’ll also need the                Good, clean cardboard will

following supplies, shown in Figures 2-3 and 2-4:                                  be worth its weight in gold
                                                                                   in these projects. We sug-
x   Pencil                                                                        gest picking up cardboard

x   Craft knife                                                                   sheets from a craft or art
                                                                                   supply store.
x   Metal ruler
x   Pliers
x   Wire stripper
x   Glue (hot glue gun or craft glue)
x   (Optional) Drill and a 3/16-inch drill bit
x   (Optional) Soldering iron
x   (Optional) Solder
x   (Optional) Helping hands (not shown)
x   Cardboard (about 12 inches square) or a cardboard box
x   Two ping-pong balls
x   Enclosure template (see Figure 2-15 on page 55)




                                                  °                     
      FIGURE 2-3:
  Recommended tools




      FIGURE 2-4:
Recommended building
            materials




                        N E W CO M P O N E N T : T H E R E S I S TO R
                        Although you used an LED on its own in Project 1, in most cases
                        it’s best to use a resistor to protect the LED from too much cur-
                        rent. Resistors like the ones in Figure 2-5 are everywhere. They are
                        indispensable when you’re building circuits, and you’ll need them to
                        complete this project, too.




                                         °                     
                                                                                FIGURE 2- 5:
                                                                                Resistors up close and
                                                                                personal




     If you think of electricity like the flow of water through a pipe, a
resistor is analogous to a point where the pipe size narrows, reducing
the water flow. (If you’re curious, see “Visualizing Electricity as Water
in a Pipe” on page 4, which describes this metaphor in detail.)
Resistors control or limit the flow of current.
     Resistance is measured in ohms (typically shortened to Ω, the
Greek symbol omega), and the colored bands on resistors represent
their resistance. You’ll find a resistor color band decoder in “Resistors
and Bands” on page 308; however, in this book, you only need to
be able to identify two different values of resistors: 330 Ω and 10 kΩ.
The bands on a 330 Ω resistor are orange, orange, and brown
(see Figure 2-5), while on a 10 kΩ resistor they’re brown, black,
and orange. There is also a fourth band on a resistor, and its color
indicates the resistor’s tolerance. A resistor’s value will be accurate
within a certain tolerance: silver means the resistor has a 5 percent
tolerance, while gold indicates a 10 percent tolerance. The projects
in this book aren’t sensitive enough for the tolerance level to make a
difference, though, so we’ll just refer to the resistors by their assumed
value, which will work for either tolerance band.
     Some components, like LEDs, can be damaged if the current
flowing to them is too high, and resistors can protect those compo-
nents by reducing the current. Having a resistor in line with an LED
to limit the current to a safe level is a good precaution so your LED
doesn’t burn out—or, in the worst case, pop! (Yes, they can literally
pop.) From here on, we’ll use current-limiting resistors in all projects.




                                               °                     
W H Y T H E S TO P L I G H T U S E S 3 30 Ω R E S I S TO R S
An average red LED has a maximum current rating of about 20 mA,
as listed on its datasheet. In order to protect it, you need to add a
resistor to keep the current below this limit. But how do you know
to use a 330 Ω resistor?
     The output pins on the Arduino provide 5 V when they are
turned on. Depending on the color, each LED needs a slightly
different amount of voltage to turn on, typically in the range of
2.0 to 3.5 V. A red LED turns on at about 2 V, and that leaves 3 V
remaining. The 3 V will be dissipated across a resistor or anything
else that is in line in the circuit. It’s generally good practice to limit
the current going through an LED to about half the maximum, so
for the red LED with a maximum current rating of 20 mA, you get
10 mA. You can calculate the resistor needed for 3 V and 10 mA
with Ohm’s law (remember 10 mA = 0.01 A):

          V=I×R
               V     3V
          R=     =        = 300 Ω
               I   0.01 A

     But 300 Ω isn’t a standard resistor value. The closest standard
resistor value is 330 Ω, and usually the nearest standard resistor is
good enough. This should ensure that the LED lasts for a very, very
long time. Since the resistor will be dictating the current, this is a
current-limiting resistor.
     If you have different resistors available, you could use a different
value resistor and see what happens. Bigger resistors will make the
current smaller, and smaller resistors will make the current bigger.
What happens if you use the 10 kΩ resistor instead?




B U I L D T H E S TO P L I G H T P R OTOT Y P E
Now it’s time to build the circuit. First, take a look at the schematic
shown in Figure 2-6. You’ll build this on a breadboard, as shown in
Figure 2-7.




                    °                     
      arduino              arduino            arduino
      pin 13               pin 12             pin 11                                        FIGURE 2-6:
                                                                                            Schematic diagram for the
                                                                                            Stoplight project

red             yellow               green
led                  led                led




           330 Ω                330 Ω              330 Ω




            gnd                  gnd                gnd


     The schematic illustrates how each component is connected
electrically. Pin 13, pin 12, and pin 11 on the Arduino will each be
used to control an individual LED on the Stoplight circuit. As you can
see in the schematic, each LED is connected to an individual resistor,
and each resistor is connected to GND (ground). Next, let’s look at
the wiring.

                                                                                            FIGURE 2-7:
                                                                                            Connecting a red LED to a
                                                                                            breadboard with a current-
                                                                                            limiting resistor




                                                           °                     
                            Connect the Red LED to the Breadboard
                            Now you’ll start to translate the schematic into an actual circuit. In
                            the first project, you blinked an LED built into the Arduino board. This
                            LED was internally wired to pin 13 on the Arduino. Because you’ll be
                            using three discrete LEDs, you need to wire these up yourself. Take
                            out your breadboard, and, following the schematic in Figure 2-6 or
                            the illustrated diagram in Figure 2-7, connect pin 13 to the positive
                            (long) leg of the LED.
                 NOTE            To wire this on the breadboard, we suggest that you first posi-
  For a refresher on how    tion your Arduino and breadboard as shown in Figure 2-7. (This will be
 breadboards work, see      the standard layout throughout the book.) Then, find a red LED and a
“Prototyping Circuits” on
                            330 Ω resistor. Bend the resistor legs as shown in Figure 2-8 so that
                 page 6.
                            the resistor is easier to insert into the breadboard. We suggest using
                            wire cutters to trim both resistor legs by about half their length to make
                            the resistor easier to work with. Resistors aren’t polarized like LEDs, so
                            you don’t have to keep track of which leg is positive or negative.

        FIGURE 2-8:
      Bending a resistor




                                 Figure 2-9 shows a diagram of a typical breadboard. Most
                            breadboards have labeled columns and numbered rows as ref-
                            erences. Using these reference points, insert the LED into your
                            breadboard as shown in Figure 2-7. The long, positive leg (anode)
                            should be in column E, row 1 (E1) on the breadboard, and the short,
                            negative leg (cathode) should be in column E, row 2 (E2). Now, find
                            a 330 Ω (orange-orange-brown) resistor. Insert one leg of the resistor
                            into any hole in row 2 of the breadboard to connect the resistor to the
                            short leg of the LED. In our diagram, we insert this leg of the resistor
                            into A2 on the breadboard. On all standard breadboards, for each
                            row, columns A–E are connected, and columns F–J are connected.
                            Now, insert the other leg of the resistor into the breadboard’s nega-
                            tive power rail, which is the column marked with a blue or black line
                            and a – (minus) symbol.


                                              °                     
                                                                                 FIGURE 2-9:
                                                                                 A breadboard has
                                                                                 numbered rows and
                                                                                 columns labeled with
                                                                                 letters.




Add Power to the Breadboard
Grab two male-to-male jumper wires. We suggest using black for
ground (GND) and red for power, and that’s the convention we’ll fol-
low throughout this book.
     Connect the black wire from the GND pin on the Arduino to the
negative power rail on the breadboard. There are three pins labeled
GND on the Arduino. You can use any of these. The power for each
LED will actually come from the digital pins. Since pin 13 will power
the red LED, connect a wire from pin 13 on the Arduino to A1 on the
breadboard.
     Plug your Arduino board into your computer using a USB cable,
and the “Hello, world!” sketch from Project 1 should run, causing
your LED to blink. In fact, both the LED on the breadboard and the
LED on the Arduino should be blinking, because they’re both wired
into pin 13.

                                                °
                                            




                                                                       
                               If the breadboard LED doesn’t blink but the Arduino one does,
                          double-check your wiring and the orientation of the LED. Make sure
                          that the shorter leg is in the second row of the breadboard, con-
                          nected to the resistor, and that the resistor is connected to GND
                          through the negative power rail. After you get the red LED blinking,
                          disconnect the Arduino from the computer so that you can safely
                          build the rest of the circuit. It’s best practice to disconnect the
                          board while building your circuit.

                          Add the Yellow and Green LEDs
                          Now, connect the yellow LED to pin 12 on the Arduino and the green
                          LED to pin 11; you can follow the same basic instructions you fol-
                          lowed for the red LED, but use different pairs of rows for each new
                          LED, as in the final wiring diagram in Figure 2-10.

   FIGURE 2-10:
  The final Stoplight
circuit, using pins 11,
           12, and 13




                                Each LED should have its own resistor wired to the ground rail,
                          just like the schematic from Figure 2-6. Notice, too, that we gave
                          each LED a little space on the breadboard so that we could have
                          room to plug in wires without messing up other parts of the circuit.
                          Although we suggested a specific way to plug in this circuit, remem-
                          ber that you can use any part of the breadboard—so long as the
                          two wires you’re trying to connect are in the same row. Once you’re
                          done, your circuit should resemble Figure 2-11.




                                              °
                                          




                                                                     
                                                                                  FIGURE 2-11:
                                                                                  The completed Stoplight
                                                                                  circuit, including the
                                                                                  Arduino, LEDs, and
                                                                                  resistors




     To mimic a real stoplight, this project needs a way to turn on
each light for a certain amount of time and then switch to the next
one. Fortunately, an Arduino sketch can use all kinds of instructions,
including timing commands, to control a circuit.


P R OG R A M T H E S TO P L I G H T
Now, plug your Arduino back into your computer. It’s time to get
programming! Open the Arduino IDE to start a new sketch.

Confirm Your IDE Settings
When writing any sketch, you should always start with a little house-
keeping. First, check that the Board type and Port are properly set.
Click ToolsBoard now. If you’re using the SparkFun RedBoard or
a standard Arduino Uno, select Arduino/Genuino Uno. Then, click
ToolsPort. In Windows, your Arduino should be set to the high-
est numbered COM port. On OS X or Linux, the port should be listed
as /dev/cu.usbserial-A<xxxx>, where <xxxx> is a string of random
characters unique to your Arduino.

Create Placeholders for Pin Numbers
With your IDE settings confirmed, you’re ready to create the sketch.
As discussed in “Anatomy of an Arduino Sketch” on page 27, a
basic Arduino sketch consists of two parts: the setup() function
and the loop() function. That simplified description is true for most
simple sketches, but more complex sketches have many different
parts. One new part that the Stoplight sketch uses is the global


                                                 °
                                             




                                                                        
namespace, which is the part of your sketch above the setup()
function and completely outside of any function. In this space, you
can define certain names (variables) as placeholders for values, and
these values will then be available for all parts of your sketch to use.
Arduino sketches can work with several types of values.

Data That Sketches Understand
The Arduino language includes a number of possible data types
for values, and there are a few you’ll run into often when writing
sketches. The following list isn’t exhaustive, but it touches on the
big ones and shows how their names appear in code:

Integer (int)    A whole number that ranges from –32,768 to 32,767
Float (float) A number that has a decimal point and ranges from
–3.4028235E+38 to 3.4028235E+38
Byte (byte)     A number that ranges from 0 to 255
Character (char) A single letter, denoted by a set of single quotes,
such as 'a'
String (String) A series of characters, denoted by a set of double
quotes, such as "hello"
Boolean (Boolean) A value of either true or false, which maps to 1
or 0 in the sketch and HIGH or LOW in terms of pin output

    Arduino sketches require you to specify the data type of a vari-
able when you define it. Let’s look at how that works.

Values That Can Change
Most values you’ll create to use in your sketches will be variables.
Think of a variable as a placeholder for a piece of data. That data can
be a number, a letter, or even a whole sentence.
     Before you can use a variable, you have to define it, which
includes giving it a name, declaring its data type, and initializing it
with a value. It’s a good habit to give a variable a value at the moment
you define it, which looks something like this:

Xint Yval = Z10;

     This variable definition has three parts: the data type X, the name
of the variable Y, and the variable’s value Z. At the end of this line,
notice that there is a semicolon—this denotes the end of a statement
or instruction. The semicolon is very important, and forgetting it is
often the root cause of many compiler errors or bugs in code, so be
careful to remember it!

                     °
                 




                                            
     When choosing a variable name, you can use any unbroken set
of characters, including letters and numbers. There is one caveat
here: variables cannot start with a number or consist of any special
characters. We suggest making variable names as descriptive as
possible, while keeping them short. It’s a chance for you to be a little
creative with abbreviating words and descriptions. In this example,
we chose to name the variable val (short for value), and 10 is the
variable’s initialized value, or the value assigned to a variable to start
with. You don’t need to initialize a variable when you define it, but
doing both at the same time is helpful and a good practice.
     For this project, you’ll create three variables to store pin numbers
for the three LEDs the Arduino will control. It’s a lot easier to work
with a variable that describes an LED color than it is to try to remem-
ber which LED is connected to which pin!
     Start a new sketch, and add the code in Listing 2-1 to the global
namespace of your sketch.

byte redPin = 13;                                                                LISTING 2-1:
byte ylwPin = 12;                                                                Variables that represent pin
byte grnPin = 11;                                                                numbers


     Again, these three variables store the pin numbers for the three            NOTE
LEDs. On the Arduino, pin numbers are limited to whole numbers                   For legibility, we camel-

between 0 and 13, so we use the byte data type. We can use byte                  cased the variable names
                                                                                 by capitalizing the p in pin.
because we know that the pin number will be less than 255. Notice
                                                                                 Camel-casing is a coding
that each variable’s name describes what it contains: redPin is for              convention that allows you
the red LED pin, ylwPin is the yellow LED pin, and grnPin is the                 to separate words in a vari-
green LED pin. And, just as Figure 2-10 shows, the red pin is pin 13,            able without using spaces.
yellow is pin 12, and green is pin 11. Now, anytime you use a pin
number in your sketch, you can use the descriptive variable name
instead.

Write the setup() Function
To continue writing the Stoplight sketch, add the setup() function in
Listing 2-2.

void setup()                                                                     LISTING 2-2:
{                                                                                setup() code for the
  //red LED                                                                      Stoplight
  pinMode(redPinX, OUTPUTY);
  //yellow LED
  pinMode(ylwPin, OUTPUT);



                                                °                     
                          //green LED
                          pinMode(grnPin, OUTPUT);
                      }

                          Just like the “Hello, world!” sketch in Project 1 (see “The setup()
                      Function” on page 30), this sketch configures the digital pins of the
                      Arduino in setup() with the pinMode() function.
                          This project uses three different digital pins, so the sketch has
                      three separate pinMode() functions. Each function call includes a pin
                      number as its variable X (redPin, ylwPin, and grnPin) and the con-
                      stant OUTPUT Y. It uses OUTPUT because this sketch controls LEDs,
                      which are output devices. We’ll introduce INPUT devices in Project 4.

                      Write the loop() Function
                      Next comes the loop() function. Normal stoplights cycle from red to
                      green to yellow and then back to red, so this project does, too. Copy
                      the code from Listing 2-3 into the loop() portion of your sketch.

  LISTING 2-3:        void loop()
loop() code for the   {
          Stoplight     //red on
                        digitalWrite(redPin, HIGH);
                        digitalWrite(ylwPin, LOW);
                        digitalWrite(grnPin, LOW);
                        delay(2000);

                          //green on
                          digitalWrite(redPin, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(ylwPin, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(grnPin, HIGH);
                          delay(1500);

                          //yellow on
                          digitalWrite(redPin, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(ylwPin, HIGH);
                          digitalWrite(grnPin, LOW);
                          delay(500);
                      }

                           The Stoplight will have only one light on at a time, to avoid con-
                      fusing your hallway traffic and causing chaos. To maintain order, each
                      time an LED is turned on, the other LEDs should be turned off. For
                      example, if you wanted the red light to be on, you’d call the function
                      digitalWrite(redPin, HIGH), followed by digitalWrite(ylwPin,
                      LOW) and digitalWrite(grnPin, LOW). The first call writes HIGH to


                                         °
                                     




                                                                
turn on the red LED on redPin (pin 13), and the other two calls write
LOW to ylwPin and grnPin (pins 12 and 11) to turn off the yellow
and green LEDs. Because the Arduino runs at 16 MHz (roughly one
instruction per 16 millionth of a second), the time between these
commands is on the order of a few microseconds. These three com-
mands run so fast that you can assume they all happen at the same
time. Finally, notice the function delay(2000). This function pauses
the sketch and keeps the red light on for 2,000 ms, or 2 seconds,
before executing the next set of instructions.
     The code for the yellow and green LEDs repeats the same
concept, setting the corresponding pin to HIGH and the others to
LOW and delaying for different lengths of time. For your own Stoplight,
try changing the delay times to something a little more realistic for
your hallway’s traffic. Remember that the value you pass to the
delay() function is the amount of time you want the LED to stay
on in milliseconds.

Upload the Sketch
After you’ve typed in all of the code, double-check that it looks like
the code in Listing 2-4, save your sketch, and upload it to your
Arduino by clicking SketchUpload or pressing CTRL-U. If the IDE
gives you any errors, double-check your code to make sure that it
matches the example code exactly. Your instructions should have
the same spelling, capitalization, and punctuation, and don’t forget the
semicolon at the end of each instruction.
     When everything works, your LEDs should turn on and off in
a cycle that is similar to a real stoplight—starting with a red light,
followed by a green light, and then a short yellow light before return-
ing to the top of the loop() function and going back to red. Your
sketch should continue to run this way indefinitely while the Arduino
is powered.

byte redPin = 13;                                                                 LISTING 2- 4:
byte ylwPin = 12;                                                                 Complete code for the
byte grnPin = 11;                                                                 Stoplight

void setup()
{
  pinMode(redPin, OUTPUT);
  pinMode(ylwPin, OUTPUT);
  pinMode(grnPin, OUTPUT);
}



                                                 °
                                             




                                                                        
                        void loop()
                        {
                          //red on
                          digitalWrite(redPin, HIGH);
                          digitalWrite(ylwPin, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(grnPin, LOW);
                          delay(2000);

                            //green on
                            digitalWrite(redPin, LOW);
                            digitalWrite(ylwPin, LOW);
                            digitalWrite(grnPin, HIGH);
                            delay(1500);

                            //yellow on
                            digitalWrite(redPin, LOW);
                            digitalWrite(ylwPin, HIGH);
                            digitalWrite(grnPin, LOW);
                            delay(500);
                        }


                        Make the Stoplight Portable
                        When your Arduino is connected to your computer, it’s receiving
                        power through the USB port. But what if you want to move your
                        project or show it around? You’ll need to add a portable power
                        source—namely, a battery pack. The Arduino board has a barrel
                        jack power port for plugging battery packs into, as well as an on-
                        board voltage regulator that will accept any voltages from about 6 V
                        to 18 V. There are many different battery adapters available, but we
                        like using a 4 AA battery adapter for a lot of our projects, as shown in
                        Figure 2-12.

  FIGURE 2-12:
A 4 AA battery pack
   with a barrel jack
            adapter




                                           °
                                       




                                                                  
     Unplug the USB cable from your computer, insert four AA batter-
ies into your battery pack, and plug your portable battery pack into
your Arduino, as shown in Figure 2-13. If your batteries are charged,
you can move your project around or embed it directly into a model
stoplight!

                                                                                  FIGURE 2-13:
                                                                                  Making the Stoplight
                                                                                  portable by adding a
                                                                                  battery pack




    Now you’ll level up this project. In the next section, we’ll show
you how to turn these LEDs into a model stoplight that you can
mount in high-traffic areas of your house.


B U I L D T H E S TO P L I G H T E N C L O S U R E
Once your Arduino isn’t tethered to a computer, you can build any
electronics project into a more permanent enclosure. The circuit on
your breadboard is great, but you probably have to use your imagina-
tion to picture it as a stoplight. For maximum effect, the Stoplight just
needs a good housing and lenses that will make the lights visible from
a distance. The enclosure is optional if all you want to do is proto-
type, but we hope you’ll try it out.
     For this project, we’ll show you how to build a more realistic-
looking stoplight with some cardboard or cardstock, but you can use
any material that you happen to have lying around. Be creative! Our
example, shown in Figure 2-14, is made from some cardboard, ping-
pong balls, and a bit of crafting skill.




                                                 °
                                             




                                                                        
          FIGURE 2-14:
        An enclosure made
       from cardboard and
            ping-pong balls




                      NOTE            You can either build a stoplight on your own using this project
  If you’re lucky enough to      only as an inspiration or, if you want to reproduce this project exactly
  have access to a cutting       as you see it here, download the ZIP file of templates and sketches
      machine like a Cricut,
                                 at https://www.nostarch.com/arduinoinventor/. Each project in this
       a Silhouette Cameo,
or a laser cutter, these files
                                 book includes templates that you can print, trace, and hand-cut the
  should easily translate to     old-fashioned way with a craft knife and a metal ruler.
           those tools, too.          Extract the Project 2 files from the ZIP file, and print the Stoplight
                                 template PDF at full size if you’d like a cutting guide. With your tem-
                                 plates in hand, collect the other items listed in “Other Materials and
                                 Tools” on page 39 and start building.

                                 Cardboard Construction
                                 First, cut out the templates, shown in Figure 2-15. In our template,
                                 the housing body is a single piece of cardboard that is meant to be
                                 cut out, scored, and folded.
                                      Trace the template onto your cardboard, and make careful note
                                 of the dashed lines, perhaps by drawing them on your cardboard in a
                                 different color. You’ll score the cardboard along those lines to bend it,
                                 so whatever you do, don’t cut along them yet.




                                                     °
                                                 




                                                                            
        shades                  w      v                                                    w   FIGURE 2-15:
                                                                                                Enclosure template for the
                                                                                                Stoplight (not full size)




                              u                                                             u
                                                                                     leds




                                w      v                                                    w

     Once you have everything traced, cut out the stoplight pieces
along the solid lines using a craft knife and a metal ruler, as shown
in Figure 2-16. If you’ve never used a craft knife before, be sure to
read “Using Craft Knives Safely” on page 56. Score the cardboard
for the housing along each dotted line, on the exterior side of the
cardboard. When scoring cardboard, you take a couple of shallow
passes with the craft knife (don’t cut all the way through). Don’t score
the shades yet.

                                                                                                FIGURE 2-16:
                                                                                                Scoring along the template
                                                                                                with a craft knife and metal
                                                                                                ruler




                                                    °
                                               




                                                                           
             USING CRAFT KNIVES SAFELY
You’ll use craft knives a lot in this book, so it’s important to know
how to safely use them. Just like any tool, when used incorrectly,
craft knives like the one here can cause injury.




     Here are a few tips for using craft knives safely:
x   Always pull the blade when slicing through sheet materials.
     Pushing or forcing the blade in any other direction raises the
     potential for slipping or breaking the blade.
x   Be patient. Don’t try to cut through the entire thickness of the
     material in a single pass. Make multiple passes with medium
     pressure. This will save your blade and also produce a cleaner
     finished product in the end.
x   Use a straightedge made of metal, such as a metal ruler. If you
     use a wooden or plastic ruler as a straightedge, you run a higher
     chance of your blade catching the straightedge, rebounding off
     the material, and ultimately moving toward your hand.
x   Keep your fingers out of the way. This may seem obvious, but
     accidents happen.
x   If your knife starts to roll off your desk, let it fall, and just pick it
     up off the floor. If you reach for it and catch it before it falls, you
     run the risk of stabbing yourself in the hand. Ouch!
x   Finally, use sharp, new, and intact blades. If a blade breaks,
     replace it. If a blade is dull, replace it. Cutting through paper and
     cardboard dulls blades very quickly. Keep a supply of extra blades
     around, and if it’s starting to get hard to cut, replace the blade.



                          °
                     




                                                 
     Once you have cut out your cardboard enclosure, add the
mounting holes for the three LEDs; these should be at the little
solid-lined circles inside the big dashed circles. One easy option
is to carefully press a sharp pencil through the cardboard to make
the holes. For cleaner holes, however, we suggest using a 3/16-
inch drill bit and power drill to make holes in the cardboard, as in
Figure 2-17. The LEDs are about 5 mm (about 0.197 inches) in
diameter. You want the hole to be a nice, tight fit. So, a 3/16-inch
hole (0.1875 inches) is perfect for making the fit snug for the LED.
     Be careful when completing this step, and make sure to watch
where your fingers and hands are relative to the drill bit. You don’t
want to drill into yourself! You can also use the drill bit without the drill
and manually spin it through the cardboard if you don’t have a drill or
aren’t comfortable using one.

                                                                                        FIGURE 2-17:
                                                                                        Drilling holes for the LEDs




     Once you have the holes drilled, remove the three LEDs from
your breadboard and insert them through the back side of the card-
board, as shown in Figure 2-18. Remember that standard traffic
lights are usually ordered red, yellow, and green from the top to the
bottom. Pay attention to where the LEDs connect on the board,
because we’re going to reconnect them at the end.




                                                       °
                                                  




                                                                              
    FIGURE 2-18:
All three LEDs pressed
    into the cardboard




                             Next, bend the cardboard along the scored lines, as shown in
                         Figure 2-19. Bend the vertical sides X toward the interior, and then
                         do the same with the top and bottom sides Y and the tabs Z. (The
                         sides and tabs are labeled in Figure 2-15.)

     FIGURE 2-19:
 Prefolding the scored
    cardboard to form
  an enclosure for the
             Stoplight




                              Position the tabs Z inside the vertical sides X, and glue them
                         in place as shown in Figure 2-20. You can use hot glue, tape, or
                         craft glue—we prefer hot glue because it’s easy to work with, sets
                         quickly, and has a pretty strong bond.
                              Repeat this for the top and bottom corners. You should end up
                         with a shallow rectangular box with an open back.




                                                °
                                           




                                                                       
                                                                                FIGURE 2-20:
                                                                                Folding and gluing the
                                                                                cardboard housing




Make the Stoplight Lenses
The Stoplight’s lenses are made from ping-pong balls cut in half, but
you can use anything that’s moderately translucent.
      If you’re using ping-pong balls or something similar, carefully
cut two balls in half. When doing this, place the ball against a cut-
ting mat or thick piece of cardboard and hold it firmly at the sides
with your fingertips. Carefully push the knife blade down toward
the mat and into the ping-pong ball (making sure the blade isn’t
pointing at you or your hand) to make an incision as shown in
Figure 2-21. Rotate the ping-pong ball and repeat until you’ve cut
all the way through. Make sure to keep your fingers away from the
blade, and always cut on a cutting mat or a piece of cardboard.

                                                                                FIGURE 2-21:
                                                                                Safely cutting a
                                                                                ping-pong ball




                                               °
                                           




                                                                      
                         Once you have three ping-pong ball halves (you’ll have four;
                     one’s an extra to use in future projects or as a small hat for your
                     favorite stuffed animal), secure them with a dab of hot glue as
                     shown in Figure 2-22.

FIGURE 2-22:
The enclosure with
ping-pong balls as
           lenses




                     Make the Shades
                     Finally, add the shades to the Stoplight. For a nice curve, make
                     a number of parallel scores, about 1/8 inch apart, as shown in
                     Figure 2-23. There are example score lines in the template, so you
                     can follow those. After making all of your scores, bend each shade
                     into a curve, as shown in Figure 2-24.

 FIGURE 2-23:
  Scoring a shade




                                        °
                                    




                                                               
                                                                                 FIGURE 2-24:
                                                                                 Bending the shade into a
                                                                                 curve




     Once you have the shades bent and shaped to your liking, fit
them into the housing just above each lens, as shown in Figure 2-25,
and then glue them in place. If you’re going for a more finished or
realistic look, you can spray paint the housing black. Make sure you
either remove the lenses or cover them with masking tape first so
that they don’t get coated in spray paint.

                                                                                 FIGURE 2-25:
                                                                                 Fitting a shade into the
                                                                                 housing




Mount the LEDs and Arduino
All you have left to do is to connect the LEDs from the new enclo-
sure to your Arduino. First, use two male-to-female jumper wires
(SparkFun PRT-09385) to extend each of the LEDs. You’ll need a
total of six of these jumper wires. Simply plug each LED leg into the


                                                °
                                            




                                                                       
                           female end of the jumper wire. To keep things organized, we like to
                           use black wires for the negative (shorter) leg and colored wires for the
                           positive (longer) leg, as shown in Figure 2-26.

      FIGURE 2-26:
Attaching jumper wires
            to the LEDs




                                With the jumper wires connected to the LEDs, plug the male end
                           into the breadboard in the same place where the LED came out, as
                           shown in Figure 2-27. Again, pay attention to which LED goes where.
                           If you don’t remember, consult the original diagram in Figure 2-10.

      FIGURE 2-27:
 Inserting the male end
of each jumper wire into
        the breadboard




                                              °
                                          




                                                                     
     Check to make sure your connections work by plugging in the
Arduino to your computer or to a battery pack. If one of the lights
isn’t working, try jiggling the connections or double-checking that the
wires are plugged into the correct row on the breadboard.
     You can either leave the Arduino and breadboard outside the
Stoplight housing or tack them inside the housing with glue or double-
sided tape. Whatever you decide, when you’re done, power up your
Stoplight, and go find a busy hallway intersection in need of traffic
safety.
     Figure 2-28 shows the finished Stoplight in all its glory.

                                                                                 FIGURE 2-28:
                                                                                 Finished Stoplight project




                                                °
                                            




                                                                       
GOING FURTHER
The concepts you saw while building the Stoplight, such as timing
the control of output (LEDs), can be applied to a number of differ-
ent uses in your house and life. Here are a couple of suggestions for
adapting the Stoplight.

Hack
The basic concept of a stoplight is all about timing. When else would
a timer be useful? What about changing the code to help you time
frying an egg? You could rework the Stoplight so that the red LED is
lit while the egg is still in a state of “iffy” or “rare” doneness, the yellow
LED lights when it’s almost cooked the way you like it, and then the
green LED lights when the egg is done.
     We can’t give you the timing, as we probably have different
preferences for how we like our eggs cooked. There are also a
number of variables that will affect the timing, like the temperature,
the type of pan, and the size of the egg. You’ll have to figure that all
out on your own.
     In the code, you’d need to work with pretty big numbers for the
delay, since it’s measured in milliseconds. To set a delay in minutes,
all you need is a little multiplication. Remember that 1,000 ms equals
1 second; multiply by 60, and you’ll find that 60,000 ms equals
60 seconds, or 1 minute. For a delay of 3 minutes, you can multiply
3 by 60,000 directly in the delay() function, like this:

delay(60,000 * 3);

     You may be wondering how long you can set the delay() func-
tion for. The data type that delay() receives is an unsigned long,
which is any number that falls in the range of 0 to 4,294,967,295. So
the maximum delay is 1,193 hours or so. Pretty cool! Knowing this, is
there anything else you’d want to time with the delay() function?




                     °
                 




                                            
Modify
If you’re looking to make this project more permanent and sturdy,
you can solder wires to the LEDs instead of using the male-to-female
jumpers. If you’ve never soldered before, turn to “How to Solder” on
page 302 for some soldering instructions before you start. You’ll
need to snip the end off of a male-to-male jumper wire, strip the insu-
lation back about 1/2 inch using wire strippers, and then solder the
stripped end to each leg of a trimmed LED, as shown in Figure 2-29.
Notice that we twisted the wire around the leg of the LED to hold it
securely while soldering. After soldering, the connection will be more
durable, and you’ll be able to use the LEDs for other projects since
the other end is still a male jumper.

                                                                                    FIGURE 2-29:
                                                                                    Soldering a cut jumper wire
                                                                                    to an LED




     Though this project looks impressive, the programming and hard-
ware are pretty simple. As you read about sensors and logic over the
next few chapters, we encourage you to think back to this project and
brainstorm ways you can elaborate on it with what you learn.




                                                   °
                                              




                                                                          
