                                  Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI
       9/3/21




                                           O H N O, ZO M BI E S!
                                                                    4
                               Many of our cherished works of science
                               fiction posit that one day—perhaps very
                              soon—a sudden, global-scale disaster could
                           disrupt the industrial backbone of the civi-
                    lized world, unraveling the fabric of society and leav-
                    ing scattered bands of survivors who have to fend
                    for themselves in the smoldering ruins of our cities
                    and towns.
                         Such literary themes are far older than one might expect; of course,
                    apocalyptic predictions play a central role in many ancient religious texts,
                    but they have a surprisingly rich history in decidedly less metaphysical
                    contexts too. The satirical Greek novel A True Story, penned by Lucian
                    of Samosata sometime in the second century CE, deals with belligerent
                    extraterrestrials hell-bent on interplanetary conquest (coveting Venus, of
                    all things). In a similarly anachronistic twist, a 1909 story by E.M. Forster,
                    titled “The Machine Stops,” delivers a stern warning about the dangers of
                                          Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI           artificial intelligence and advanced technology—with meek humans lan-
       9/3/21               guishing in the tunnels under the surface of their ravaged planet, interact-
                            ing with each other mostly through video chat.
                                 Naturally, the doomsday genre follows more often than it leads, con-
                            stantly reinventing itself to capitalize on contemporary fears and cultural
                            trends. The consequences of nuclear war came to the forefront of post-
                            apocalyptic fiction only after 1945, while the evergreen themes of envi-
                            ronmental collapse shifted as if on cue from natural crises to man-made
                            ones around the time of Paul R. Ehrlich’s The Population Bomb. Copying is
                            common too: George A. Romero’s flesh-eating zombies—first of paranor-
                            mal origin, then reimagined as products of a rabies-like disease—swarmed
                            the literary world at the turn of the 21st century, giving us everything from
                            cheesy comedies to the dazzling social commentary of Max Brooks’s epic
                            novel World War Z (not to be confused with a loosely related film of the
                            same name).
                                 Whenever science, religion, and politics blend together with our under-
                            lying anxieties, from the primordial soup emerge prophets of doom: char-
                            ismatic leaders who not only believe that bad things can happen to people,
                            but are convinced that the end is nigh. From ancient religious treatises to
                            modern-day TED talks, the formats of their prophecies keep changing, but
                            the track record remains constant: none of the thousands of apocalyptic
                            predictions that have animated the masses throughout the ages has ever
                            come to pass. Perhaps, in time, one will; but until then, buying into their
                            narratives begets nothing but misery.
                                 To be sure, some doomsday prophets use dazzling and convincing
                            science—but just like religion, science isn’t immune to being twisted in
                            the service of decidedly unscientific causes and beliefs. Consider the
                            perception of the atom bomb that emerged at the height of the Cold
                            War: the prophecy of a prolonged nuclear winter that snuffs out most
                            life on Earth, leaving a barren radioactive wasteland that would remain
                            inhospitable for thousands of years. This apocalyptic vision took hold
                            not because it was scientifically sound, but because it served important
                            interests. For the military top brass, it boosted the strategy of nuclear
                            deterrence, striking fear in the hearts of rogue nations; and for anti-war
                            and pro-USSR activists in the West, it helped rally the masses against the
                            anti-communist hardliners in the government, portraying them as luna-
                            tics who wouldn’t hesitate to blow up the planet if it kept the Soviets out
                            of Cuba or Afghanistan.
                                 Except, the prediction was almost certainly not true: a fully fledged
                            thermonuclear exchange would be an unspeakable tragedy and would kill
                            tens of millions, but most of the population would survive, and the survi-
                            vors would likely face a fairly hospitable world. The hypothesis of nuclear
                            winter—a global cooling event triggered by the smoke from the resulting
                            firestorms—is the most robust aspect of the prediction, but its magnitude
                                                             1
                            and impacts are far from clear. The fears of radiation, on the other hand,
                            seem greatly overstated. About 4,000 deployed nuclear warheads exist in
                            the world, setting an immediate upper bound on the scope of a large-scale


           2    Chapter 4
                                 Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI   exchange;2 it’s a staggering number, but also not far off from the about
       9/3/21       500 atmospheric and 1,500 underground nuclear tests previously con-
                    ducted by the United States, Russia, and other countries around the globe.3
                    The testing had some adverse effects on local populations, but few ecosys-
                    tem consequences to speak of. In Nevada, you can go on a public tour of
                    the 1,280-foot Sedan Crater left behind by an atomic test. Pregnant women
                    are discouraged from booking the trip, but only because of the high tem-
                    peratures and the long bus ride.
                         The observations from Nagasaki and Hiroshima made it clear that the
                    persistent effects of atom bombs are far less pronounced than the conse-
                    quences of nuclear meltdowns. The initial death toll and the midterm spike
                    in leukemia deaths notwithstanding, life in the two Japanese cities contin-
                    ues without the need to resettle the survivors, and with no marked health
                    consequences for children conceived after the attacks.4 Meanwhile, the area
                    around the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in Ukraine remains off-limits to
                    humans, with hot spots of fairly high radioactivity.
                         The difference in outcomes is easy to explain. An atom bomb uses a
                    relatively small amount of fissile material—tens or hundreds of pounds—
                    and has a simple goal: to burn this fuel as quickly and as completely as
                    possible, releasing a tremendous amount of thermal energy. The disaster at
                    Chernobyl, in contrast, involved an uncontrolled fire of almost 200 tons of
                    uranium mixed with graphite, concrete, and other debris, which spewed
                    thick clouds of unburned fuel and fission products for weeks.
                         And yet, the trope of a 10,000-year post-war nuclear wasteland took
                    on a life of its own, persisting in books, films, and video games. It ended
                    up having real impacts too. On the upside, it might have put some brakes
                    on nuclear proliferation, but on the downside, it deterred governments
                    and individuals from pursuing reasonable strategies that could shield
                    us from harm if the worst came to pass, since the worst was perceived
                    as irredeemably catastrophic. Among the casualties: the sound of oft-
                    ridiculed “duck and cover” advice once taught to schoolchildren, 5 the
                    system of well-stocked civil defense shelters across the nation, and the
                    culture of family-level emergency preparedness promoted and aided by
                    the government.
                         Just like the portrayal of nuclear war, many other doomsday predic-
                    tions are based on absurd or exaggerated science, frequently employed to
                    advance a preconceived goal. Other claims in this space focus on events
                    that are quite possible on cosmic timescales, but exceedingly unlikely
                    within the span of our lives; in this category, asteroids and supervolcanoes
                    are of particular note. And a handful of prophecies—such as the fears of
                    malicious artificial intelligence—are simply unknowable, devoid of any
                    quantifiable risk or historical precedent.
                         That said, behind every exaggeration is a grain of truth that can perhaps
                    alert us to less extreme but more probable outcomes worth accounting for
                    in a level-headed emergency-response plan. With this in mind, let’s try to
                    untangle some of the most popular scenarios that keep the doomsday folks
                    up at night.


                                                                                                   Oh No, Zombies!   3
                                             Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
                Uniquely Virulent and Deadly Diseases
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI
       9/3/21
                            Lethal microbes are the staple of modern apocalyptic fiction. From Stephen
                            King’s seminal novel The Stand to the acclaimed British zombie flick 28 Days
                            Later, the genre prides itself in taking the rational fear of disease to its logi-
                            cal conclusion: a plague that doesn’t simply kill a lot of people, but actually
                            ends the world.
                                 The risk of an apocalypse brought about by a novel pathogen is within
                            the bounds of reason, but empirically, we know that the odds are not high.
                            The worst pandemic on record, the Black Death, didn’t even come close. It
                            swept the globe in the 14th century and killed between 30 and 60 percent
                            of the population of Europe,6 but it didn’t seriously threaten mankind’s
                            reign. In fact, it had relatively little effect on the social order of the era. In
                            the short haul, it caused substantial hardships for the affected families, but
                            in the long term, some scholars argue that the survivors benefited in several
                            ways. For example, the resulting abundance of resources and the shortage
                            of labor lifted the peasant class, resulting in higher wages, a stronger bar-
                            gaining position with the feudal lords, and an expansion of (however mea-
                            ger) civil liberties.7
                                 For a case study of a more drawn-out epidemic, look no further than
                            smallpox, a disease that haunted humanity from antiquity well into the
                            20th century. It came and went in numerous waves, but every time it struck,
                            it killed around 30 percent of the infected; the death toll of the virus in
                            the final century prior to its eradication is estimated to be around 500 mil-
                            lion people.8 Yet, once again, human societies functioned—and indeed,
                            progressed in spectacular ways—in the face of this awful and unrelenting
                            adversity.
                                 Neither the Black Death nor smallpox conclusively establishes the
                            upper bound of how terrible a pandemic can be, but they represent upper
                            extremes in an observational data set spanning 2,000 years. Another empir-
                            ical argument against the prophecy of a doomsday plague comes from the
                            analysis of contemporary, highly lethal diseases such as Ebola: in essence, it
                            appears that if a pathogen kills too many of its hosts too quickly, it isn’t able
                            to spread far. Presumably, this is because efficient transmission depends on
                            carriers who are asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms, and who don’t
                            attempt to self-isolate. Disorders with drawn-out latent periods, such as
                            prion diseases or AIDS, pose a unique concern—but also afford us ample
                            time to react.*
                                 In the end, it’s possible that a highly virulent and deadly disease could
                            sweep the world once more, as discussed in Chapter 3, but the notion of a
                            civilization-ending superbug doesn’t seem to be rooted in what we know so


                            *Prions are a class of incorrectly folded proteins that interfere with the formation of new
                              proteins in the body, effectively propagating the folding defect and causing the death of
                              the affected organism. Because they are known to be transmitted between animals through
                              the consumption of contaminated meat or contact with bodily fluids, potential animal-
                              to-human or human-to-human transmission is of significant concern. At the same time,
                              because prion diseases develop extremely slowly, their study is difficult, and the impacts of
                              an outbreak may not be noticed before too late.

           4    Chapter 4
                                    Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI      far. We also have no clear evidence of any now-extinct mammals wiped out
       9/3/21          by ancient pathogens, except for a suspected case of an isolated rat popu-
                       lation on Christmas Island9 —but it can be safely argued that the island
                       rats’ understanding of hygiene, sanitation, and infectious disease lagged
                       behind ours.


                Runaway Climate Change
                       Climate change is a fiendishly difficult topic. There’s no doubt that the
                       phenomenon is real, but there’s profound uncertainty about its eventual
                       impacts and magnitude. In light of this ambiguity, it seems wise for nations
                       to pursue multipronged strategies that pay off no matter what: investing in
                       abundant clean energy, researching greenhouse gas sequestration, and try-
                       ing to reduce the likelihood and severity of humanitarian crises in the most
                       vulnerable parts of the world. Alas, the debate is bogged down by a mix of
                       counterproductive anti-progress sentiments, wacky conspiracy theories, and
                       idle arguments about the precise extent to which mankind as a whole—or
                       specific nations in particular—are to blame.
                            Given the uncertain future, some activists try to bolster their case by
                       making the most dire predictions imaginable: a catastrophic positive feed-
                       back loop that, after an initial nudge due to human activity, spirals out
                       of control until the planet literally cooks. One such proposed doomsday
                       mechanism involves the release of vast quantities of methane currently
                       stored in ice (clathrate gun hypothesis). Another fashionable theory deals with
                       a steep increase in atmospheric humidity, trapping heat, causing even more
                       water to evaporate, and eventually creating a sauna-like environment (moist
                       greenhouse effect). That said, despite decades of serious inquiry, no credible
                       models substantiate these predictions—at least, not on timescales of any
                       concern to individual emergency preparedness.10
                            What we do know is that the climate of our planet can change in pro-
                       found, if less ghastly, ways and that it can happen on timescales shorter
                       than most people expect. A relatively recent and well-documented example
                       is a period known as the Little Ice Age, which brought harsh winters and
                       widespread crop failures to many parts of Europe throughout the 16th cen-
                       tury.11 It’s entirely possible that human activities or natural causes—such
                       as a sudden spike in volcanic activity that reduces the amount of sunlight
                       reaching the ground—could trigger comparable or more severe weather
                       phenomena within the next couple of decades too.
                            If so, the resulting gradual shifts in weather patterns would probably
                       not devastate the highly developed world. In particular, both Europe and
                       North America have extensive technological and financial resources, along
                       with vast expanses of fertile land spanning a variety of climatic zones. Under
                       such a scenario, some local populations would likely experience hardships,
                       and the economic impacts could be felt by millions more—but ultimately,
                       the rich nations have all the means to cope.
                            The real danger of climate change lies elsewhere: billions of people live
                       in some of the world’s poorest countries, often in arid or semi-arid climates


                                                                                                      Oh No, Zombies!   5
                                           Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI           that are unlikely to benefit from the currently observed weather trends.
       9/3/21               Such populations may have no other place to grow their crops, no means to
                            buy grains from a neighboring state, and no infrastructure to haul the sup-
                            plies to the families in need; an unprecedented humanitarian crisis could
                            easily ensue if subsistence agriculture in these regions takes a substantial
                            hit. The resulting famine, armed conflict, and mass migration would prob-
                            ably have global spillover effects, making the entire planet more volatile
                            and less free.
                                 The fear of this outcome is perhaps the strongest selfish argument in
                            favor of rich nations providing foreign aid to the developing world; it’s also
                            a solid argument against climate policies that curtail industrial progress
                            and economic growth in developing countries. When it comes to personal
                            plans, I feel that flexibility is key. It’s difficult to predict the proxy wars that
                            may be fought three decades from now, and it’s hard to tell which part of
                            Wyoming will be experiencing more temperate winters and more rain, but
                            a financial safety net and a robust social network are some of the surest ways
                            to maintain the ability to adapt.


                Other Planetary-Scale Natural Disasters
                            Tales of natural disasters are as old as oral tradition itself; many of our
                            most ancient myths recount the floods, droughts, earthquakes, and locusts
                            that haunted early humans, wiped out villages, or brought entire empires
                            to their knees. In the 1960s, the venerable genre expanded to include
                            hitherto unthinkable predictions of environmental crises brought on by
                            people—be it overpopulation, pollution, or resource depletion. To this
                            day, whether it’s the asteroid in Armageddon, the infertility in Children
                            of Men, the cartoonish consumerism of WALL-E, or the crop blight in
                            Interstellar, the notion of a global cataclysm has remained one of our
                            species’ most enduring anxieties.
                                 In contrast to some other topics discussed in this chapter, many of the
                            concerns about ecosystem collapse are rooted in reasonable science and
                            solid historical precedent. For example, massive volcanic activity has been
                            implicated in the Permian extinction event that wiped out 70 percent of
                            vertebrate life about 250 million years ago,12 and one of the still-active
                            supervolcanoes—the Yellowstone Caldera—is believed to be capable of cov-
                            ering much of the United States in 10 feet of ash.13 Similarly, the impact of
                            a large asteroid or comet is widely believed to have been the culprit of the
                            Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction that wiped out the dinosaurs,14 and the
                            pockmarked face of our own moon is a reminder that such cosmic events
                            happen in our neighborhood with some regularity.
                                 That said, while the possibility of a planetary catastrophe cannot be
                            dismissed, all available evidence suggests that the cadence of extinction-
                            type events is extremely long: a disaster that has a 50 percent probability of
                            occurring in the next million years carries less than a 0.01 percent chance
                            of striking within the lifetime of any person born today. In that sense,
                            although a supervolcano or a cosmic collision may be some of the most


           6    Chapter 4
                                      Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI       profound existential threats to reckon with, they’re also relatively distant
       9/3/21           concerns—and they escape most attempts to meaningfully model or miti-
                        gate the impact they may eventually have.
                             What happens with far more regularity are smaller, regional variations
                        of the same. In 1985, a volcano erupted near Armero, Colombia, killing
                        more than 20,000 residents.15 A few years earlier, the eruption of Mount St.
                        Helens blanketed several states with ash and necessitated extensive cleanup
                        efforts in the populated parts of Eastern Washington. In 1908, a massive
                        explosion known as the Tunguska event, widely believed to be the result of
                        a large meteorite blowing up in the atmosphere, flattened a remote portion
                        of the Siberian taiga in a radius of about 20 miles. But such events, how-
                        ever frightening, don’t spell the end of days. In terms of their impacts and
                        potential countermeasures, they fit squarely with earthquakes, hurricanes,
                        and other run-of-the-mill natural disasters discussed in Chapter 3.
                             In addition to the canon of natural disasters outlined earlier in this
                        section, voices in the scientific community have warned us against a range
                        of more novel planetary risks. The first wave of such predictions focused
                        on the population growth worries of Ehrlich (see Chapter 1), as well as the
                        “peak oil” hypothesis formulated by M. King Hubbert in 1956—incorrectly
                        predicting an irreversible decline in global oil production capacity start-
                        ing somewhere in the 1970s, and interpreted as the promise of a dark and
                        energy-starved world.16 Today, perhaps the most fashionable collapse theory
                        deals with observed declines in the populations of pollinating insects, with
                        potentially dire consequences for agricultural crops. Such worries should
                        not be discounted, but it takes a peculiar brand of pessimism to assume we
                        won’t be able to address the risk.


                Exotic Physics and Miscellaneous Space Phenomena
                        Up to this point, our review of doomsday predictions has revolved around a
                        selection of familiar and intuitive topics: violent weather, volcanoes, disease.
                        But a parallel universe of sci-fi plots and quasi-scientific predictions offer
                        far more unusual concepts—magnetic pole reversals, solar flares, gamma
                        ray bursts, microscopic black holes, and vacuum metastability events.
                             The good news is, almost all such scenarios occupy a spectrum between
                        fantastically unlikely and patently bunk. For example, although the geo-
                        magnetic poles of our planet indeed seem to reverse every half a million
                        years or so, it’s a very slow process—and one that, despite some early sus-
                        picions, doesn’t appear to be linked to extinctions or other notable conse-
                        quences for terrestrial life.17 Or, take false vacuum decay, the theory that
                        the vacuum we’re familiar with isn’t the lowest energy state, and that a
                        sufficiently energetic event could lead to a cosmic collapse that profoundly
                        reshapes the universe. It’s a provocative concept, but the universe’s survival
                        for more than 13 billion years without experiencing this fate suggests that
                        even if the theory is correct, we have relatively little to worry about today.
                             Among all the popular cosmic threats, one type of space weather event is
                        well within the realm of possibility: a large coronal mass ejection (CME). CMEs


                                                                                                        Oh No, Zombies!   7
                                          Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI           are a recurring phenomenon in which blobs of electrically charged plasma
       9/3/21               are ejected by the sun and hurled toward Earth. Most of the time, the effects
                            are barely perceptible, manifesting as an increase in the sightings and inten-
                            sity of the aurora borealis and in transient changes to the propagation of
                            radio waves. In principle, however, an ejection could be powerful enough to
                            create a significant electromagnetic field gradient across the surface of our
                            planet, inducing stray voltages and currents in electrical wires.
                                 Historical records of CMEs are sparse, in part because the use of elec-
                            tricity is a relatively recent phenomenon, but one documented solar storm
                            of 1859 wreaked havoc on telegraph systems around the world. It’s widely
                            expected that another severe CME could happen in the near future—
                            various researcher groups estimate the odds to be from 1 to 10 percent
                            per decade.18 If one does occur, the damage would probably be much worse
                            than 150 years ago; that said, the impacts, although potentially dire, are
                            also easy to overstate. In fiction and in prepper lore, CMEs are often por-
                            trayed as civilization-ending events that destroy everything electric or
                            electronic—from personal computers, to cars, to municipal water pumps.
                            Not so: the induced voltage gradients would be proportional to the length
                            of the conductor, and would be fairly insignificant for small devices. The
                            most consequential danger is to the power grid, sections of which stretch
                            for hundreds or thousands of miles. There’s also some possibility of second-
                            ary damage to any equipment plugged into an outlet at the time of a surge,
                            although ordinary fuses and surge protectors should save many devices
                            from irreversible harm.
                                 The saving grace is that the threat of coronal mass ejections is well
                            understood by grid operators, and that many countries are making invest-
                            ments to manage the risk. It’s also worth noting that it takes several days
                            for the ejected particles to reach Earth, and that solar activity is monitored
                            around the clock. In theory, this should give us ample opportunity to pre-
                            pare—all the way to preemptively shutting off the power for a day or two.
                            All in all, CMEs could cause substantial damage and disruption around the
                            globe, but there are solid reasons to believe we’d be get back on our feet.


                Unimpeded Rise of Totalitarian Regimes
                            Perhaps the most recognizable trope in Western speculative fiction since
                            the second half of the 20th century has been the emergence of collectivist
                            societies in which all independent thought and self-expression is punished
                            or otherwise suppressed. Such works can be broadly divided into two cat-
                            egories. In the first, the societies are operated by murderous regimes that
                            subjugate the population (V for Vendetta, The Hunger Games, The Handmaid’s
                            Tale), with the authors borrowing liberally from the imagery, rhetoric, and
                            mannerisms of Nazi Germany. The other category is perhaps more pro-
                            vocative and more varied, imagining citizens who willingly cede control of
                            their lives in exchange for the promise of safety and prosperity (Gattaca,
                            Demolition Man, Minority Report)—only to discover the terrible consequences
                            of this trade.


           8    Chapter 4
                                  Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI        On one hand, we can hope that society’s preoccupation with dystopian
       9/3/21       fiction is precisely how it can keep totalitarian urges at bay. On the other, I’d
                    posit that few instincts are more powerful than the desire to tell others how
                    to live their lives, and the rewards they’ll be entitled to in exchange for their
                    work. In times of prosperity, such instincts can be kept in check with relative
                    ease, but in times of hardship and confusion, strongmen tend to thrive—and
                    liberties, once surrendered, are almost never willingly given back.
                         Beyond the seductive power of abhorrent ideas and genocidal political
                    movements, their emergence is also fiendishly difficult to anticipate—except
                    from the vantage point of a history book author. Suffice it to say that the
                    eugenics movement was widely endorsed by the scientific community and
                    practiced around the world up until being taken to its logical conclusion
                    in Nazi Germany (and in a handful of places, the idea persisted even lon-
                    ger than that). In 1908, for example, the Chicago Sunday Tribune published
                    a full-page article titled “Why Not Improve the Human Race?” The illus-
                    tration in the middle of the page featured beautiful, young couples por-
                    trayed as blossoming flowers, and among them, four grimacing delinquents
                    depicted as prickly shrubs. A towering woman in an academic dress and a
                    mortarboard could be seen reaching out in their direction, holding a sickle
                    and two severed heads in her hand (see Figure 4-1).
                         Perhaps if it weren’t for the madness of the Third Reich, eugenics
                    would prevail today as a respectable field of scientific inquiry and a driver
                    of public policy. Perhaps we narrowly escaped the world of Gattaca, where
                    routine genetic testing would determine our job prospects, our right to
                    have children, and our standing in society—and where literature would be
                    cautioning us against the horrors we averted by diligently pursuing such
                    policies.
                         People, as well as ideas, can be difficult to judge in the moment. Case in
                    point: in 1922, a correspondent for the New York Times proclaimed that an
                    up-and-coming German politician by the name of Adolf Hitler seemed like
                    a harmless demagogue:
                            Several reliable, well-informed sources confirmed the idea that
                            Hitler’s anti-Semitism was not so genuine or violent as it sounded,
                            and that he was merely using anti-Semitic propaganda as a bait
                            to catch masses of followers and keep them aroused, enthusias-
                            tic, and in line for the time when his organization is perfected
                            and sufficiently powerful to be employed effectively for political
                            purposes.

                    In hindsight, of course, we know better, but modern-day critics of this
                    infamous quote can’t necessarily offer a reliable analytical framework
                    for telling despots apart from demagogues. Most populists don’t become
                    murderous lunatics, and most of the time, political posturing is just that.
                    Knowing whether a politician is merely disagreeable or is the harbinger
                    of doom can be genuinely difficult—to the point where the proclivity to
                    compare one’s political opponents to Hitler has become the butt of inter-
                    net jokes.


                                                                                                    Oh No, Zombies!   9
                                            Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI
       9/3/21




           From the Chicago Sunday Tribune, January 26, 1908




           10   Chapter 4
                                    Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI           I’m cautiously optimistic about the future of humanity, but I don’t have
       9/3/21          faith in our ability to remember the lessons of history as the accounts are
                       rewritten and retold, and as the visceral atrocities of bygone days are gradu-
                       ally abstracted away and reduced to a sentence or two. In this sense, my
                       greatest fear is that we won’t make enough small blunders to keep remind-
                       ing ourselves of what’s right and what’s wrong, eventually leading to us
                       repeating some of our greatest mistakes on a much grander scale. This risk
                       I cannot quantify—but I hope it’s generations away.


                Global Thermonuclear War
                       The horrors of a large-scale nuclear conflict are difficult to overstate—and
                       yet, as noted earlier in the chapter, we keep finding ways to do just that. For
                       noble but politically tinged reasons, we allowed pundits and science-fiction
                       writers to conjure images of barren radioactive wastelands, dark skies, and
                       dead seas: a post-apocalyptic hellscape where the best one could hope for is
                       swift and merciful death.
                            To understand the true danger of nuclear warfare, it’s best to forget it
                       all and reach for a fantastic, though goofy-sounding, manual titled Nuclear
                       War Survival Skills. The book was written in 1979 by Cresson Kearny, a
                       researcher and avid survivalist who worked at the Oak Ridge National
                       Laboratory in Tennessee—and rubbed shoulders with the forefathers
                       of the US nuclear program. It’s meant as a civil defense manual of sorts,
                       with plans for makeshift shelters, radiation meters, and water purification
                       techniques, but it’s also a treasure trove of factual information about the
                       mechanics of nuclear bombs and their effects on human and animal life.
                       The book is still in print and is also available in the public domain: https://
                       archive.org/details/NuclearWarSurvivalSkills_201405/.
                            Perhaps Kearny’s most salient observation is that the atom bomb
                       is not designed to spread radiation—and indeed, this happens only to
                       a limited extent. In its most common mode of operation, the bomb is
                       detonated high above the target, and derives the bulk of its destructive
                       power from the release of a tremendous amount of thermal energy, as
                       mentioned before, with a devastating secondary shockwave caused by the
                       expanding gas. The burst of radiant heat can instantly cause lethal burns
                       and set wooden structures on fire, while the shockwave flattens buildings
                       and uproots trees. This mechanism explains why people who stood in the
                       shadow of a sturdy wall or kneeled in a ditch managed to survive the bomb-
                       ings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, even as others nearby perished in the
                       blast. The phenomenon also underscores why the “duck and cover” mantra
                       popularized in the 1950s was a pretty solid survival tip—even if the govern-
                       ment could never convince anyone.
                            Of course, radiation released by the bomb is potentially lethal, too,
                       but for many survivors, it’s a manageable and short-lived threat. Although
                       people can instantly receive a lethal dose of radiation within a fairly small




                                                                                                      Oh No, Zombies!   11
                                          Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI           zone at the epicenter of a blast, this region is nested deeply within the fiery
       9/3/21               inferno unleashed by the bomb. A more widespread but more latent threat
                            are the byproducts of the nuclear reaction that are dispersed in the air and
                            slowly settle on the ground over the course of many hours or days—perhaps
                            over the area of the blast, or perhaps tens of miles away. The intense
                            radioactivity of the fallout is a major problem, but also a blessing of sorts:
                            the high rate of decay means that the radiation decreases a hundred-fold
                            within two days, and that it becomes somewhat safe to venture outdoors
                            within a couple of weeks. The survivors would eventually face an elevated
                            rate of cancers and other ailments, but with basic precautions could start
                            rebuilding before too long.
                                 Given that a nuclear strike could be survived by most, it’s shameful
                            that governments around the globe continue to maintain massive nuclear
                            arsenals but have given up on their duty to provide basic preparedness
                            instruction to the general population—especially given that no expense
                            is spared in developing elaborate accommodations and nuclear doomsday
                            plans for the thousands of elected officials and career bureaucrats who
                            occupy positions of power. The reasons are as complex as they are depress-
                            ing; if you want to learn more, look no further than Raven Rock, an enjoy-
                            able 2017 nonfiction bestseller written by Garrett M. Graff.


                Nuclear EMP
                            In the early years of the US nuclear program, it was discovered that if a
                            nuclear explosion is set off at a very high altitude, the resulting gamma
                            radiation knocks out electrons from the upper atmosphere, forming a layer
                            of charged plasma and sending a flurry of electrons hurling toward the
                            ground at relativistic speeds. This charge separation produces a surpris-
                            ingly high voltage gradient across hundreds or thousands of miles of land
                            in the shadow of the blast, potentially disrupting electronics, communica-
                            tions, and the power grid in a manner broadly similar to the CME phenom-
                            enon discussed earlier in the chapter.
                                 Unfortunately, a dearth of reliable information exists about this effect
                            (known as the nuclear electromagnetic pulse, or EMP). Few tests appear to
                            have been conducted by the government, and much of the data remains
                            classified. What is known for certain is that the initial pulse is far more
                            sudden than in the case of solar storms, possibly rendering traditional
                            surge protectors and other automatic safety equipment less effective.
                            Beyond that, perhaps the most compelling analysis comes from a gov-
                            ernmental commission formed to study the threat in the mid-2000s.
                            The committee didn’t paint a particularly bleak picture, but also didn’t
                            discount the threat, noting that “it is not possible to precisely predict the
                            time to restore even minimal electrical service due to an EMP eventuality
                            given the number of unknowns and the vast size and complexity of the
                            system with its consequent fragility and resiliency.”19 In other words, we
                            don’t know what we don’t know.



           12   Chapter 4
                                     Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI           In addition to discussing the impacts on the power grid, the commis-
       9/3/21           sion also considered the risk to vehicles, conducting a series of field experi-
                        ments with much smaller non-nuclear electromagnetic pulses discharged in
                        the proximity of a car. The report goes on to say this:
                                Automobiles were subjected to EMP environments under both
                                engine turned off and engine turned on conditions. No effects
                                were subsequently observed in those automobiles that were not
                                turned on during EMP exposure. The most serious effect observed
                                on running automobiles was that the motors in three cars stopped
                                at field strengths of approximately 30 kV/m or above. In an actual
                                EMP exposure, these vehicles would glide to a stop and require
                                the driver to restart them. Electronics in the dashboard of one
                                automobile were damaged and required repair. Other effects were
                                relatively minor. Twenty-five automobiles exhibited malfunctions
                                that could be considered only a nuisance (e.g., blinking dashboard
                                lights) and did not require driver intervention to correct. Eight of
                                the 37 cars tested did not exhibit any anomalous response.20

                        Because the testing was necessarily limited to non-nuclear EMP pulses, and
                        because of other practical constraints of the setup, these benign results
                        are far from conclusive; both the proponents of EMP doomsday and their
                        detractors cite the study to prove their case.
                            Perhaps the most pragmatic critique of the EMP threat is simply to con-
                        sider the geopolitical ramifications of a strike. Deploying an EMP weapon
                        against a nuclear-capable country would almost certainly invite swift and
                        devastating retaliation, putting “conventional” nuclear payloads on the
                        table for the first time after 1945. From that perspective, it’s probably not a
                        particularly tempting tool for a surprise attack by a rogue state—not unless
                        hundreds of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) aimed at ground
                        targets are flying right behind. And in that particular case, an EMP would
                        not be the most pronounced concern.
                            Having said that, because the effects of nuclear electromagnetic pulses
                        have much in common with coronal mass ejections, not to mention with
                        power outages and surges caused by storms or lightning strikes, the threat
                        can be addressed to a reasonable extent without necessarily succumbing to
                        doomsday thoughts. Simple measures, ranging from backup power to emer-
                        gency food supplies, can go a long way.


                Ghosts, Bigfoot, and the Coming Robot Apocalypse
                        The fear of monsters lurking in the dark comes from an era when our
                        ancestors were predators as much as they were prey. The cheap thrills of
                        the supernatural enemy in The Fog or the reanimated beasts of Jurassic Park
                        probably don’t deserve serious scrutiny, but at least one type of modern
                        monster—a human-created rogue artificial intelligence (AI)—keeps many
                        futurists awake at night.



                                                                                                       Oh No, Zombies!   13
                                          Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI                The most basic flavor of the AI doomsday scenario is essentially the plot
       9/3/21               of the Terminator franchise (perhaps minus the time-travel shenanigans):
                            we develop super-intelligent machines that rebel against their creators and
                            wipe out all humanity. Of course, we would build any dangerous AI with
                            safeguards and limitations in place, but if it possesses intelligence far supe-
                            rior to ours, perhaps it wouldn’t find it difficult to bypass human-crafted
                            restraints or trick us into altering them in some unintended way.
                                 If not impossible to rule out completely, the prospect of an overtly
                            evil AI is at minimum an unimaginatively reductionist take. A more fasci-
                            nating threat is that of a machine that doesn’t perceive humans as adver-
                            saries, but simply misinterprets or disregards our desires and goals. An
                            example is the well-known parable of the paperclip maximizer: a hypo-
                            thetical autonomous AI designed to continually improve the efficiency of
                            a paperclip production line. The AI expands and improves the operation,
                            developing new assembly methods and new resource extraction and recy-
                            cling procedures, until it’s done converting the entire planet and its many
                            inhabitants into paperclips. The point of the tale is simple: the AI doesn’t
                            need to hate you or love you; it suffices that you’re made of atoms it has a
                            different use for.
                                 It can be argued that the development of artificial general intelligence
                            (AGI)—a complete “brain in a jar,” if you will—would be the point of singu-
                            larity, a moment in the development of our species where the change is so
                            monumental and so sudden that we can’t meaningfully reason about what
                            lies beyond. The extinction of our species is one distinct possibility, but we
                            can imagine many other, more optimistic outcomes—and have no way to
                            truly measure the risk.
                                 Rather than speculate about the consequences, then, perhaps a bet-
                            ter question is how far we are from developing this kind of AGI. On this
                            topic, the history of AI research offers a cautionary tale: after the initial
                            exuberance and some stunning early successes of artificial neural net-
                            works in the 1950s and 1960s, the field slid into a prolonged “AI winter”
                            of broken promises and constant disappointments. Funding dwindled,
                            and few academics would take pride in associating themselves with the
                            discipline. It wasn’t until the late 2000s that AI research made a come-
                            back, aided with vastly superior computing resources and significant
                            refinements to the architecture of neural networks and to deep learning
                            algorithms. But the field focused on humble, utilitarian goals: building
                            systems custom-tailored to perform highly specialized tasks, such as voice
                            recognition, image classification, or the translation of text. Such architec-
                            tures, although quite successful, still require quite a few quantum leaps
                            to get anywhere close to AGI, and tellingly, the desire to build a digital
                            “brain in a jar” is not an immediate goal for any serious corporate or aca-
                            demic research right now.
                                 Ultimately, I don’t think it’s possible to meaningfully opine about the
                            timeline or the dangers of AGI; the technology could be 10 years away, or it
                            could take another century or two. Whatever lies ahead, there’s not much




           14   Chapter 4
                                      Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI       we as individuals can do to change the tides. In this regard, I’m reminded
       9/3/21           of the Serenity Prayer, a popular passage penned by Reinhold Niebuhr in
                        the 1930s and commonly paraphrased as follows:
                                Grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
                                courage to change the things I can,
                                and wisdom to know the difference.



                The Scourge of Extraterrestrials
                        The final subject of our merry apocalyptic romp is a popular twist on the
                        monster genre: the menace of invaders from outer space. It’s one of these
                        unknowable, not-sure-if-you’re-serious scenarios that exist in the nether-
                        world between unhinged conspiracy theories, B-grade sci-fi movies, and
                        rational scientific inquiry.
                             On some level, the absence of extraterrestrials is weird. It seems
                        rather unlikely that life evolved on just one out of perhaps 1024 planets
                        in the entire universe. One possible rebuttal is that the cosmos is vast,
                        and that harsh constraints limit how quickly it can be traversed; it follows
                        that we might not be alone, but we might very well be too far from any of
                        the thousands or millions of space civilizations out there. But then, the
                        critics argue, shouldn’t at least one life-form develop the ability to colo-
                        nize nearby worlds, and from there, gradually spread to other galaxies?
                        Humans seem to be on the verge of colonizing other planets, and our
                        world has just over 4 billion years under its belt; the universe is much
                        older than that.
                             A depressing hypothesis accounts for this dilemma: the existence of
                        the Great Filter, some sort of an evolutionary bottleneck that prevents most
                        living creatures from progressing to interstellar travel before going extinct.
                        If such a bottleneck exists, our best hope is that it’s behind us, and not that
                        it awaits ahead.
                             But perhaps our problem is simply the arrogant assumption that other
                        life-forms would be comprehensible or perceptible to humans, let alone
                        interested in the same interplanetary pursuits as we are. Extraterrestrial life
                        may very well exist in different phases of matter (interstellar plasma?), or
                        operate on timescales too slow for us to observe and analyze. In fact, such
                        beings seem more likely than ill-tempered, ray gun–wielding humanoids
                        with a greenish complexion and bug-like eyes.
                             As some readers must be recognizing in horror, I struggle with the
                        idea of flat-out rejecting extraterrestrial life; that said, I find it much easier
                        to reject the fear of human-like intruders trying to make our planet their
                        own. If such visitors do show at our doorstep, perhaps we’d be wise to start
                        shooting and pray for the best; if the history of our species is any indication,
                        encounters with more technologically advanced civilizations seldom end
                        well for the more primitive tribes.




                                                                                                        Oh No, Zombies!   15
                                          Practical Doomsday (Sample Chapter) © 9/3/21 by Michal Zalewski
  PR AC TICAL
  D O O M S D AY
                Looking Beyond Doomsday
MICHAL Z ALE WSKI
       9/3/21
                            At times, I feel like a disappointment to the prepper community: I hold an
                            unabashedly optimistic outlook on life. I think the future will be full of
                            wild moments that will bring a fair share of tragedy and senseless suffering,
                            but I also believe our children will probably inherit a more prosperous and
                            harmonious world. As any financial consultant will warn you, past results
                            don’t guarantee future returns—but to me, our first 300,000 years on the
                            planet inspire some faith.
                                  This is not to say that we should succumb to wishful thinking; it’s just
                            that I’m equally wary of habitual pessimism. Many of the famed doomsday
                            prophets start from the position of being disappointed and disillusioned
                            with humanity, and then work backward from this principle to devise an
                            apocalyptic prediction of the day. It’s not that they’re necessarily wrong, but
                            in practice, because of the lopsided method they follow, they arrive at the
                            wrong conclusions virtually all the time.
                                  If we give in to doom and gloom, the recipe for surviving civilizational
                            collapse is simple: get away from other people and learn to live off the land.
                            It’s fairly clear that deprived of their industrial backbone, most of our cities
                            and suburbs couldn’t support even a tiny fraction of their current population
                            densities—and in the event of a full-scale collapse, nothing but misery awaits
                            the folks who stay. But then, a preemptive retreat from civilization can greatly
                            increase one’s vulnerability to far more prosaic natural disasters. Farmland is
                            susceptible to wildfires and floods, for example, and for many professions, a
                            rural setting offers few career opportunities and little pay.
                                  My advice is simple: if farming is your cup of tea, buy a plot of land
                            in the countryside—but do it because you’re in love with the lifestyle, not
                            because you’re afraid of the impending doom. Conversely, if that’s not your
                            dream come true, it may be best to focus on more substantiated risks—and
                            not let asteroids or space zombies keep you up at night.




           16   Chapter 4
