Review of “Real World Python”

By Ian Mizer


        This is the most amazing book anyone could pick up if they are unsure about what machine
learning job they should focus on. There are a lot of great jumping off points in this book, but it does
focus primarily on machine learning and data topics. The author knows this and has made the amazing
choice to add clear “Further reading” sections that will help you get a professional understanding of the
topic. The code is solid, each chapter has it's own job associated with it, and all the libraries mentioned
can get you ready for something more technical. If that's what you're after, then come and join me in
Real World Python.

       Readability : How easy would it be for someone to sit down with this book and finish it quickly.

       Accuracy : How accurate is the information being given? Could you write every single line of
code in this book and have the books answers match the code you wrote. Normally this is a -1 out of 10
per major mistake and per 4 minor mistakes the book makes

       Subject : Does this book do what it wants to do and is what it wants to do good?

       Bonus points: for extra stuff that I liked. This will be the most subjective part of the review and
might not go into much detail. It's just little things that I highly enjoyed and wanted to give a shoutout
about
       Readability 10/10:

        This book jumps through a lot of hurdles to make sure that you can quickly sink your teeth into
and digest very complicated topics very quickly. There is a lot of pieces cut out of each topic that
improve someones ability to read this speedily. I was able to get through 40-80 pages a day to complete
this book in roughly 6 days. The main benefit of this book in readability is the ability to jump around
freely to the topic that interests you the most. Each chapter is mostly cut off from the chapters before so
you only have to take in the actual content that you think you'll enjoy. This makes the book feel so
much shorter than 300+ pages.

       Accuracy 10/10:

        I was unable to find any errors in this book. I did have issues on windows and linux with some
of this books code, but this was personal environment problems rather than code issues. Some of those
issues are almost unavoidable when working with these libraries in multiple OS's

       Subject 10/10:

        I know at least 1 person in machine learning or data that does each of these chapters as an actual
job. So I can honestly say that, while this title is a little misleading, that all of the subjects in this book
can get you hired if you know them well enough. That being said I would like to take this time to talk
about the title. I know that the title says Real world python projects, but it would be better suited in
saying it was real world ML projects in python as almost all of the chapters focus on machine learning
or data topics. At this point though I'm really just nitpicking so I won't take any points off for it, but
instead inform you guys that the book focuses on machine learning topics in python and doesn't touch
flask, django, or any libraries outside of the sphere of ML or Data.

       Bonus Points:

        +1 to the author putting in further reading sections:
        I've already gone over this in Lee Vaughn's last book “Impractical Python Projects”, but I gotta
give him kudos every time a book tries to push the reader beyond it's bounds. Making this book a
jumping off point for more knowledge is simply what every book should be doing. Because of this I
will throw a kudos at any author who does it for every book the do it in.

       Unfortunately I can't find any twitter pages or links to web pages that the author might own or
be a part of, but I know that you should keep an eye out for him if you're looking for fun, quick reads,
where each chapter can be read freely and quickly.
