                   About the Author
                           Majed Marji holds a PhD in electrical engineering from Wayne State Uni­
                           versity and an MBA in strategic management from Davenport University.
                           He has over 15 years of experience in the automotive industry, where he
                           developed many software applications for real-time data acquisition, device
                           control, test-cell management, engineering data analysis, embedded con­
                           trollers, telematics, hybrid vehicles, and safety-critical powertrain systems.
                           Dr. Marji is also an adjunct faculty member with the Electrical Engineering
                           Department at Wayne State University. He has taught courses on communi­
                           cation engineering, machine vision, microprocessors, control systems, and
                           algorithms and data structures, among other topics.


                   About the Technical Reviewer
                           Tyler Watts, EdS, is a creative-computing educator who teaches sixth
                           through eighth graders in Kansas City (Kansas) Unified School District 500
                           and adult students at the University of Missouri–Kansas City. He has been
                           using Scratch since 2009 as a tool to combat the digital divide and teach
                           students how to think like computer scientists. Since Tyler’s first year of teach­
                           ing Scratch, he has learned the importance of weaning learners off of the
                           “Scratch training wheels” and challenging them and molding them into
                           digital creators. He feels that programming is a form of personal expres­
                           sion and teaches his students to approach it as they would any other art
                           form and have fun.




LTPWS_bio.indd 5                                                                                        1/14/2014 3:56:29 PM
                                                                          Brief Contents


             Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xv

             Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xvii

             Chapter 1: Getting Started .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1

             Chapter 2: Motion and Drawing .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 25

             Chapter 3: Looks and Sound  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 47

             Chapter 4: Procedures .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 67

             Chapter 5: Variables .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 91

             Chapter 6: Making Decisions .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 123

             Chapter 7: Repetition: A Deeper Exploration of Loops .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 155

             Chapter 8: String Processing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 185

             Chapter 9: Lists .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 213

             Appendix: Sharing and Collaboration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 243

             Index .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 251




scratch_book02.indb 7                                                                                                                                                                                          1/8/2014 3:35:39 PM
                                                         5
                                                   V a r i a bl e s




                         This chapter explains how to create scripts that can
                         read in and remember values. When you use variables,
                         you can write applications that interact with users and
                         respond to their input. Here’s what we’ll cover in this
                         chapter:
                         •   The data types supported by Scratch
                         •   How to create variables and manipulate them
                         •   How to obtain input from users and write interactive programs

                              Though the scripts you wrote in the last four chapters helped you learn
                         important Scratch programming skills, they lacked many key elements of
                         a large-scale application. More complex programs can remember values
                         and decide to take an action based on certain conditions. This chapter will
                         address the first of these two deficiencies, and decision making will be cov-
                         ered in the next chapter.




scratch_book02.indb 91                                                                             1/8/2014 3:35:52 PM
                                  As you may have learned by now, scripts process and manipulate dif-
                             ferent types of data during their execution. These data can be input to
                             command blocks (for example, the number 10 in the move 10 steps com-
                             mand and the “Hello!” string in the say Hello! command) or output from
                             function blocks (like mouse x, y position and pick random), or data can
                             be entered by the user in response to the ask and wait command. For more
                             complex programs, you’ll often need to store and modify data to accom-
                             plish certain tasks. Data management in Scratch can be done using variables
                             and lists. This chapter will explore variables in detail. Lists will be explored
                             in Chapter 9.
                                  This chapter begins with an overview of the data types supported in
                             Scratch. It continues with an introduction to variables and a discussion of
                             how to create and use them in your programs. Variable monitors will then
                             be explained and used in several interesting applications. After mastering
                             the basic concepts, you’ll learn how to use the ask and wait command to
                             get inputs from the user.


                  Data Types in Scratch
                             Many computer programs manipulate different kinds of data, including
                             numbers, text, images, and so on, to produce useful information. This is
                             an important programming task, so you’ll need to know the data types and
                             operations supported in Scratch. Scratch has built-in support for three data
                             types that you can use in blocks: Booleans, numbers, and strings.
                                  A Boolean can have only one of two values: true or false. You can use
                             this data type to test one or more conditions and, based on the result, have
                             your program choose a different execution path. We’ll discuss Booleans in
                             detail in the next chapter.
                                  A number variable can hold both integers and decimal values. Scratch
                             doesn’t distinguish between the two; they’re both classified as “numbers.”
                             You can round decimal numbers to the nearest whole number using the
                             round block from the Operators palette. You can also use the floor of (or
                             ceiling of) functions, available from the sqrt of block in the Operators pal-
                             ette, to get an integer from a specified decimal number. For example, floor
                             of 3.9 is 3 and ceiling of 3.1 is 4.
                                  A string is a sequence of characters, which can include letters (both
                             upper- and lowercase), numbers (0 to 9), and other symbols that you can
                             type on your keyboard (+, –, &, @, and so on). You’d use a string data type
                             to store names, addresses, book titles, and so on.

                             What’s in the Shape?
                             Have you noticed that Scratch blocks and their parameter slots each
                             have particular geometric shapes? For example, the parameter slot in the
                             move 10 steps block is a rectangle with rounded corners, while the one
                             in the say Hello! block is a rectangle with sharp corners. The shape of the



            92   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 92                                                                                    1/8/2014 3:35:52 PM
                         parameter slot is related to the data type it accepts. Try entering your name
                         (or any other text) in the move 10 steps block; you’ll find that Scratch
                         allows you to enter only numbers into the rounded-rectangle slot.
                             Similarly, the shape of a function block indicates the data type it returns.
                         The meanings of the different shapes are illustrated in Figure 5-1.

                                Command Blocks                  Function Blocks
                                           Boolean
                                                                              Boolean
                                           parameter

                                           String                             Number/
                                           parameter                          String

                                           Number
                                                           Arrow means “can go into.”
                                           parameter


                         Figure 5-1: What the shapes of command and function blocks mean

                             Parameter slots have three shapes (hexagon, rectangle, and rounded
                         rectangle), while function blocks have only two shapes (hexagon and
                         rounded rectangle). Each shape is associated with a particular data type,
                         though you should note that a rounded-rectangle function block can
                         report either a number or a string.
                             Hexagon and rounded-rectangle slots take only function blocks of the
                         same shape, while a rectangular slot will accept any function block. The
                         good news is that Scratch prevents you from mismatching types, so you
                         don’t have to memorize this rule. Try dragging a hexagon-shaped block
                         into a rounded-rectangle slot; you won’t be able to drop it there because
                         the types are incompatible.

                         Automatic Data Type Conversion
                         As I mentioned above, a number parameter slot only accepts a rounded-
                         rectangle function block. All of the rounded-rectangle function blocks you’ve
                         dealt with so far—including x position, y position, direction, costume #,
                         size, volume, tempo, and so on—report numbers. Therefore, using them
                         inside a number slot (like the move 10 steps block) isn’t a problem. How­
                         ever, some rounded-rectangle function blocks, such as the answer block
                         from the Sensing palette or the join block from the Operators palette, can
                         hold either a number or a string. This brings up an important question:
                         What happens if we, for example, insert an answer block containing a
                         string into a number slot? Fortunately, Scratch automatically tries to con-
                         vert between data types as needed, as illustrated in Figure 5-2.
                              In this example, the user enters 125 in response to the Enter a num-
                         ber prompt. The user’s input is saved in the answer function block. When
                         this input is passed to the say command, it is automatically converted to a
                         string. When the same answer is passed to the addition operation (which
                         expects a number), it is converted to the number 125. When the addition
                         operation is performed, the result (25 + 125 = 150) is converted back to a
                         string, and “150” is passed to the say block. Scratch automatically attempts
                         to take care of these conversions for you.

                                                                                               Variables   93




scratch_book02.indb 93                                                                                  1/8/2014 3:35:52 PM
                            Figure 5-2: Scratch automatically converts between data types based on context.

                                Understanding the data types available in Scratch, the operations per-
                            mitted on these types, and how Scratch converts between them will help
                            you understand why things work the way they do. In the next section, you’ll
                            learn about variables and how to use them to store and manipulate data in
                            your programs.


                Introduction to Variables
                            Let’s say we want to create a software version of the game Whac-a-Mole. The
                            original game has a flat surface with several holes. The player uses a mal-
                            let to smack moles as they pop out of these holes. In our version, a sprite
                            appears at a random location on the Stage, stays visible for a short time,
                            and disappears. It waits a bit, and then appears again at a different location.
                            The player needs to click on the sprite as soon as it appears. Every time he
                            clicks on the sprite, he gains one point. The question for you as a program-
                            mer is, how do you keep track of the player’s score? Welcome to the world of
                            variables!
                                 In this section, I’ll introduce variables, one of the most important ele-
                            ments of any programming language. You’ll learn how to create variables
                            in Scratch and how to use them to remember (or store) different types of
                            data. You’ll also explore the available blocks for setting and changing the
                            values of variables in your programs.

                            What Is a Variable?
                            A variable is a named area of computer memory.                     side     name of the
                                                                                                        variable
                            You can think of it as a box that stores data, includ-
                            ing numbers and text, for a program to access as                   50
                                                                                                        value of the
                                                                                                        variable
                            needed. In Figure 5-3, for example, we depict a
                            ­variable named side whose current value is 50.
                                  When you create a variable, your program                Figure 5-3: A variable
                             sets aside enough memory to hold the value of the            is like a named box that
                             variable and tags the allocated memory with that             contains some value.
                             variable’s name. After creating a variable, you can
                             use its name in your program to refer to the value


           94   Chapter 5




LTPWS_05_02.indd 94                                                                                             1/17/2014 12:04:43 PM
                      it represents. For example, if we have a box (that is, a variable) named
                      side that contains the number 50, we can construct a command such as
                      move (3*side) steps. When Scratch executes this command, it will locate
                      the box named side in computer memory, grab its contents (in this case, the
                      number 50), and use that value to replace the side label inside the move
                      (3*side) steps block. As a result, the sprite will move 150 (that is, 3 × 50)
                      steps.
                           In our Whac-a-Mole game, we need a way to remember the player’s
                      score. To do that, we can reserve some space in the computer’s memory
                      (like a box) to store the score. We also need to give that box a unique label,
                      let’s say score, which will let us find it whenever we need to know or change
                      what’s inside.
                           When the game starts, we’ll tell Scratch to “set score to 0,” and Scratch
                      will look for the box labeled score and put the value 0 inside it. We’ll also
                      tell Scratch to “increase score by 1” any time the player clicks on the sprite.
                      In response to the first click, Scratch will look inside the score box again,
                      find our 0, add 1 to it, and put the result (which is 1) back in the box.
                      The next time the player clicks on the sprite, Scratch will again follow our
                      “increase score by 1” command to increment score and store the resulting
                      value of 2 in the box.
                           You’ll see the actual Scratch blocks for these operations in a moment.
                      For now, notice that the value of score changes throughout the program.
                      This is why we call it a variable—its value varies.
                           One important use of variables is to store the intermediary results of
                      evaluating an algebraic expression. This is similar to the way you do mental
                      math. For example, if you were asked to find 2 + 4 + 5 + 7, you might start
                      by adding 2 + 4 and memorizing the answer (6). You’d then add 5 to the
                      previous answer (which is stored in your memory) and memorize the new
                      answer, which is 11. Finally, you’d add 7 to the previous result to get the
                      final answer of 18.
                           To illustrate how variables can be used for temporary storage, let’s say
                      that you want to write a program to compute the following expression:

                                                      (1 / 5 ) + ( 5 / 7 )
                                                     (7 / 8 ) – ( 2 / 3 )
                          You could evaluate the whole thing with one command, but cramming
                      everything into one statement makes it hard to read, as shown below:




                           Another way to write the program is to evaluate the numerator and
                      denominator individually and then use the say block to display the result
                      of their division. We can do that by creating two variables called num (for
                      numerator) and den (for denominator) and setting their values as shown in
                      Figure 5-4.


                                                                                           Variables   95




LTPWS_05_02.indd 95                                                                              1/17/2014 12:04:48 PM
                                                                               Computer Memory
                                                                                      ...
                                                                     num           0.91428           1/5+5/7
                                                                      den           0.2083           7/8–2/3

                                                                                      ...

                             Figure 5-4: Two variables (num and den) hold the value of the expression’s
                             numerator and denominator, respectively.

                                 Take a look at how our variables are arranged in computer memory.
                             Here, num is like a tag referring to the location in memory where the
                             result of evaluating (1 / 5 + 5 / 7) is stored. Similarly, den refers to where
                             (7 / 8 – 2 / 3) is stored. When the say command is executed, Scratch grabs
                             the contents of memory labeled num and den. It then divides the two num-
                             bers and passes the result to the say command for display.
                                 We could break this expression down even further by evaluating each
                             fraction individually before displaying the result of the total expression, as
                             shown in Figure 5-5.

                                                                                Computer Memory
                                                                                       ...
                                                                       a              0.2            1/5
                                                                       b            0.7142           5/7
                                                                       c             0.875           7/8
                                                                       d            0.6666           2/3

                                                                                       ...

                             Figure 5-5: Using four variables (a, b, c, and d) to hold the four fractions
                             in the expression

                                  Here, we use four variables (named a, b, c, and d) to hold the four frac-
                             tions in our mathematical expression. The figure also depicts the memory
                             allocation; this time, you can see four variables and their contents.
                                  Although these three programs give the same answer, each implemen-
                             tation follows a different style. The first program puts everything in one
                             statement, which is tough to read. The third program breaks things down
                             to a greater level of detail, but that can be hard to read, too. The second
                             solution breaks the expression down to a reasonable level and uses vari-
                             ables to both make the program easier to understand and clearly show the
                             major parts of the expression (the numerator and the denominator). As
                             Goldilocks would say, this one is just right.
                                  This simple example demonstrates how a problem can have multiple
                             solutions. Sometimes you might be concerned about a program’s speed or
                             size, and other times your goal might be readability. Since this is an intro-
                             ductory programming book, the scripts in this book are written to empha-
                             size readability.
                                  Now that you understand what variables are and why you’d want to use
                             them, let’s make some variables and take our Scratch applications a step
                             further.


            96   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 96                                                                                         1/8/2014 3:35:53 PM
                                Creating and Using Variables
               DiceSimulator_   In this section, we’ll explore how to create and use variables through a
                 NoCode.sb2     ­simple application that simulates rolling a pair of dice and displays their
                                 sum, as illustrated in Figure 5-6.

                                                                                                The costumes of the
                                                                                                   Die1 and Die2
                                                                                Background
                                                                                                      sprites
                                                                                image




                                                                                Die2 sprite

                                                                                Die1 sprite

                                                                                Player sprite



                                Figure 5-6: The user interface of the dice simulator

                                     Our dice simulator contains three sprites: Player, Die1, and Die2.
                                The Player sprite manages the simulation. When the green flag icon is
                                pressed, this sprite generates two random numbers between 1 and 6 and
                                saves those values in two variables named rand1 and rand2, respectively. It
                                then broadcasts a message to the other two sprites (Die1 and Die2) to show
                                the randomly generated values; Die1 will show the value of rand1, and Die2
                                will show rand2. After that, the Player sprite adds rand1 to rand2 and dis-
                                plays the sum using the say block.
                                     Let’s build this application from the ground up. Open the file
                                DiceSimulator_NoCode.sb2. This file contains the background image for
                                the Stage as well as the three sprites used in the application. We’ll create
                                all the scripts we need one at a time.
                                     First, click the thumbnail of the Player sprite to select it. Select the Data
                                palette and click Make a Variable, as shown in Figure 5-7 (left). In the dialog
                                that appears, as shown in Figure 5-7 (right), type the name of the variable
                                and select its scope. A variable’s scope determines which sprites can write to
                                (or change the value of) that variable, as I will explain in more detail in the
                                next section. For this example, enter rand1 for the variable’s name and select
                                the For all sprites option for the variable’s scope. Click OK when done.


                                                                                                        
                                                                                                Type the variable’s
                                                                                                name, select its
                                                                                                scope, and click OK.


                                                             
                                                   Select the Data palette
                                                   and then click Make a
                                                   Variable.


                                Figure 5-7: Creating a variable, naming it, and specifying its scope

                                                                                                                       Variables   97




scratch_book02.indb 97                                                                                                         1/8/2014 3:35:53 PM
                                 After you create the variable, several new blocks related to it will appear
                            in the Data palette, as illustrated in Figure 5-8.
                                                       Variable name. Use the checkbox to show/
                                                       hide the variable’s monitor on the Stage.
                                                       This instruction allows you to set the value of
                                                       the variable.
                                                       This instruction allows you to change the
                                                       value of the variable by a fixed amount
                                                       (positive or negative).
                                                       These instructions allow you to show/hide the
                                                       variable’s monitor while the script is running.

                            Figure 5-8: The new blocks that appear when you create the rand1 variable

                                You can use these blocks to set a variable to a specific value, change it
                            by a fixed amount, and show (or hide) its monitor on the Stage. A variable’s
                            monitor, as you’ll learn in “Displaying Variable Monitors” on page 106, dis-
                            plays the current value stored in that variable.



                                                           N a ming Va ri a ble s

                                Over the years, people have come up with different ways to name the vari-
                                ables in their programs. One popular convention is to start the name with a
                                lowercase letter and capitalize the first letter of each additional word, such as
                                in sideLength, firstName, and interestRate.
                                      Although Scratch allows variable names to start with numbers and con-
                                tain white spaces (for example, 123Side or side length), most programming
                                languages don’t, so I recommend that you avoid these unusual names for your
                                variables. And while you can name a variable anything you want, I highly rec-
                                ommend using descriptive and meaningful names. Single-letter variables like w
                                and z should be kept to a minimum unless their meaning is very clear. On the
                                other hand, names that are too long can make your script harder to read.
                                      Also, note that variable names in Scratch are case sensitive, meaning that
                                side, SIDE, and siDE are all unique variables. To avoid confusion, try not to
                                use variables in the same script whose names differ only in case.




                                 Repeat the procedure I outlined above
                            to create another variable, named rand2.
                            The Data palette should now contain a
                            second variable block (named rand2),
                            and the down arrows on the blocks of
                            Figure 5-8 should let you choose between
                            rand1 and rand2. Now that we’ve created
                            the two variables, we can build the script
                            for the Player sprite. The complete script                Figure 5-9: The script for the Player
                                                                                      sprite
                            is shown in Figure 5-9.

           98   Chapter 5




LTPWS_05_02.indd 98                                                                                                      1/14/2014 4:20:50 PM
                           The first command sets rand1 to a random number between 1 and 6.
                      Think back to our box analogy: This command causes the sprite to find the
                      box labeled rand1 and put the generated random number inside it. The sec-
                      ond command assigns rand2 another random value between 1 and 6. Next,
                      the script broadcasts a message called Roll to the other two sprites (Die1 and
                      Die2) to notify them that they need to switch their costumes as specified
                      by rand1 and rand2. Once the Die1 and Die2 sprites have finished their job,
                      the script resumes and displays the sum of the numbers on the faces of the
                      dice using the say block. Let’s look at the Roll message handler for the Die1
                      sprite, shown in Figure 5-10.




                                                                        Drag the variable’s monitor block
                                                                        onto the parameter slot.
                                                                        The complete procedure




                      Figure 5-10: To use a variable in a command block, just drag that variable
                      over the parameter slot of that block.

                          After creating the script shown at the top right of the figure, drag the
                      rand1 block from the Data palette to the parameter slot of the switch to
                      costume block to form the complete script (bottom right). In this script,
                      the repeat block changes the costume of the die randomly 20 times to sim-
                      ulate rolling the die (you can change this number if you want). After that,
                      the die sets its costume to the number specified by rand1. Recall that each
                      die has six costumes that correspond to numbers 1 through 6 in order. That
                      means if rand1 were 5, the last switch to costume command would display
                      the costume that has five dots in it.
                           Now, we can create the script for the Die2 sprite, which should be nearly
                      identical to the one we made for Die1. Since Die2 changes its costume based
                      on rand2, all you need to do is duplicate the Die1 script for Die2 and replace
                      rand1 with rand2.
                           Our dice simulator is now complete, so let’s test it out. Click the green
                      flag icon to see the simulation in action. If the application doesn’t work,
                      examine the file DiceSimulator.sb2, which contains the correct implementa-
                      tion of the program.




                                                                                                        Variables   99




LTPWS_05_02.indd 99                                                                                             1/17/2014 1:58:49 PM
                                                                     Try It Ou t 5-1

                                Select the Player sprite and create a new variable called sum. Set the scope
                                for this variable to For this sprite only. Modify the last block of the Player script
                                to use this new variable, like this:




                                    Now select the Die1 (or Die2) sprite and look under the Data palette. Can
                                you explain why you don’t see the sum variable there?




                             The Scope of Variables
                             Another important concept related to variables is scope. The scope of a vari-
                             able determines which sprites can write to (or change the value of) that
                             variable.
           ScopeDemo.sb2          You can specify the scope of a variable when you create it by selecting
                             one of the two options you saw in Figure 5-7. Choosing For this sprite only
                             creates a variable that can be changed only by the sprite that owns it. Other
                             sprites can still read and use the variable’s value, but they can’t write to it.
                             The example shown in Figure 5-11 illustrates this point.


                                                                                                 The Penguin sprite
                                                 count is a variable whose                       can read the count
                                                 scope is set to For this                        variable of the Cat
                                                 sprite only.                                    sprite.




                             Figure 5-11: Only the Cat sprite can write to count.

                                  In this figure, the Cat sprite has a variable, named count, with the scope
                             For this sprite only. The Penguin sprite can read count with the x position of
                             Penguin block from the Sensing palette. When you select Cat as the second
                             parameter of this block, the first parameter will let you choose an attribute
                             of the Cat sprite, including one of its variables.
                                  Scratch, however, doesn’t provide a block that allows the Penguin sprite
                             to change the count variable. This way, the Penguin sprite can’t tamper with
                             count and cause undesirable effects for scripts run by the Cat sprite. It’s
                             good practice to use the For this sprite only scope for variables that should
                             only be updated by a single sprite.
                                  Variables created with the For this sprite only scope are said to have
                             local scope, and they can be called local variables. Different sprites can use the
                             same name for their local variables without any conflict. For example, if

           100   Chapter 5




LTPWS_05_02.indd 100                                                                                                    1/13/2014 12:34:11 PM
                                                        Data T y pe of a Va ri a ble

                              At this point, you might wonder, “How does Scratch know the data type of a
                              variable?” The answer is, it doesn’t! When you create a variable, Scratch has
                              no idea whether you intend to use that variable to store to a number, a string,
                              or a Boolean. Any variable can hold a value of any data type. For example,
                              all of the following commands are valid in Scratch.


                                                                               Set side to an integer value.

                                                                               Set side to a decimal value.

                                                                               Set side to a single character.

                                                                               Set side to a string.

                                                                               Set side to a Boolean value
                                                                               (true in this case).


                                   It’s up to you to store the correct values in your variables. As I described
                              earlier in this chapter, however, Scratch will try to convert between data types
                              depending on the context. To see what happens when you store an incorrect
                              data type in a variable, consider these two examples:




                                The string “Nonsense” is converted to a num-   The string “100” is converted to a number
                                ber (0) and passed to the move command.        (100) and passed to the move command.


                                   Since the move command expects a number parameter, Scratch will auto-
                              matically try to convert the value stored in the side variable to a number before
                              passing it to the move command. In the first script (left), Scratch can’t convert
                              the string “Nonsense” to a number. Rather than showing an error message,
                              Scratch will silently set the result of the conversion to 0 and pass this value to
                              the move command. As a result, the sprite won’t move. On the other hand,
                              in the second script (right), Scratch ignores the whitespace in the string and
                              passes the resulting number to the move block, so the sprite moves 100 steps
                              forward. Note that if the target block had expected a string instead of a num-
                              ber, Scratch would have passed the string as it was, whitespace included.




                           you have two car sprites in a racing game, each might have a local variable
                           named speed that determines the car’s speed of motion on the Stage. Each
                           car sprite can change its speed variable independently of the other. This
                          means that if you set the speed of the first car to 10 and the speed of the
                          ­second to 20, the second car should move faster than the first.
                                Variables with the scope For all sprites, on the other hand, can be read
                           and changed by any sprite in your application. These variables, often called

                                                                                                                  Variables   101




scratch_book02.indb 101                                                                                                     1/8/2014 3:35:54 PM
                             global variables, are useful for intersprite communication and synchroniza-
                             tion. For example, if a game has three buttons that allow the user to select
                             a level to play, you can create a global variable named gameLevel and have
                             each button sprite set this variable to a different number when clicked.
                             Then you can easily find out the user’s choice by examining gameLevel.
                                  Selecting the For all sprites option also enables the Cloud variable check-
                             box in Figure 5-7. This feature allows you to store your variables on Scratch’s
                             server (in the cloud). Blocks for cloud variables have a small square in front
                             of them to distinguish them from regular variables, like this:



                                   Anyone who views a project you’ve shared on the Scratch website can
                             read the cloud variables in the project. For example, if you share a game,
                             you can use a cloud variable to track the highest score recorded among all
                             the players. The score cloud variable should update almost immediately for
                             everyone interacting with your game. Because these variables are stored on
                             Scratch servers, they keep their value even if you exit your browser. Cloud
                             variables make it easy to create surveys and other projects that store num-
                             bers over time.
                                   Now that you understand scope, it’s time to learn about ­updating
                             ­v ariables—and then use that knowledge to create more interesting
                             programs.

                             Changing Variables
                             Scratch provides two command blocks that
                             allow you to alter variables. The set to com-
                             mand directly assigns a new value to a vari-
                             able, regardless of its current contents. The
                             change by command, on the other hand,
                             is used to change the value of a variable
                             by a specified amount relative to its cur-
                             rent value. The three scripts in Figure 5-12
                             demonstrate how you could use these com-
                             mands in different ways to achieve the same
                             outcome.
                                  All three scripts in the figure start by
                             setting the values of two variables, sum and
                             delta, to 0 and 5, respectively. The first script
                             uses the change command to change the
                             value of sum by the value of delta (that is,      Figure 5-12: Three methods for
                             from 0 to 5). The second script uses the set      changing the value of a variable
                             command to add the current value of sum to
                             the value of delta (0 + 5) and store the result
                             (5) back into sum. The third script achieves the same result with the aid of
                             a temporary variable named temp. It adds the value of sum to delta, stores
                             the result in temp, and finally copies the value of temp into sum.


           102   Chapter 5




LTPWS_05_02.indd 102                                                                                       1/13/2014 12:34:37 PM
                                   After executing any of the scripts in Figure 5-12, sum will contain
                              the number 5, making these scripts functionally equivalent. Note that the
                              method used in the second script is a common programming practice, and
                              I recommend that you study it for a moment to become comfortable with it.
                              Now let’s see the change command in action.

                              Spider Web
            SpiderWeb.sb2     We can create a spider web by drawing several hexagons of increasing size,
                              as shown in Figure 5-13. The Triangle procedure draws an equilateral
                              tri­angle with a variable side length, while the Hexagon procedure calls
                              Triangle six times with a 60° (that is, 360° / 6) right turn after each call.
                              The figure clearly shows how the hexagon is made up of the six triangles.

                                                               sideLength




                              Figure 5-13: Creating a spider web by drawing several hexagons of increasing size

                                   The SpiderWeb procedure simply calls Hexagon repeatedly with a dif-
                              ferent value of the sideLength variable each time. This results in the concen-
                              tric (that is, having the same center) hexagons you see in the figure. Note
                              how the change command is used to set the value of sideLength inside the
                              repeat loop. Reproduce the SpiderWeb procedure, run it, and see how it
                              works.

                              Pinwheel
               Pinwheel.sb2   This example is similar to the previous one except that this time, we’ll use
                              a variable to control the number of triangular repetitions. The resulting
                              procedure (called Pins) is shown in Figure 5-14. The Pinwheel procedure
                              in the same figure works like the SpiderWeb procedure above, but we also
                              change the pen’s color each time through the loop for a fun rainbow effect.
                              Some outputs of the Pinwheel procedure for different pin counts are shown
                              in the figure. Experiment with this procedure to see what else you can
                              create.


                                                                                                         Variables   103




LTPWS_05_02.indd 103                                                                                              1/14/2014 4:21:31 PM
                              Figure 5-14: Creating a pinwheel by rotating an equilateral triangle several times

                                  Now that we’ve explored the fundamentals of variables, you might won-
                              der what happens to variables when you duplicate a sprite. Does the dupli-
                              cate share the parent sprite’s variables, or does it have its own copies? Do
                              clones have access to global variables? We’ll answer these questions in the
                              next section.


                                                                 Try It Ou t 5-2

                                 Alter the Pinwheel program to hide the sprite. This should make it easier for you to
                                 watch the drawing without the sprite getting in the way.




                              Variables in Clones
                              Every sprite has a list of properties associated with it, including its current
                              x-position, y-position, direction, and so on. You can imagine that list as a
                              backpack holding the current values of the sprite’s attributes, as illustrated
                              in Figure 5-15. When you create a variable for a sprite with a scope of For
                              this sprite only, that variable gets added to the sprite’s backpack.
                                   When you clone a sprite, the clone inherits copies of the parent sprite’s
                              attributes, including its variables. An inherited property starts out identi-
                              cal to the parent’s property at the time the clone is created. But after that,
                              if the clone’s attributes and variables change, those changes don’t affect
                              the parent. Subsequent changes to the parent sprite don’t affect the clone’s
                              properties, either.


            104   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 104                                                                                                 1/8/2014 3:35:54 PM
                                                                 Stage’s backpack
                   Sprite’s backpack
                                                               costume #, costume         STAGE
                 x-position, y-position,                       name, volume #,
                 direction, costume #,                         graphic effects, etc.
                 costume name, size,
                 volume, graphic
                 effects, etc.                                                                                  Variables with scope
                                                                                                                    For all sprites
                 All variables with
                 scope For this
                 sprite only                           clone
                                            clone

                   Clone1 backpack                                        Clone2 backpack
                 x-position, y-position,                                x-position, y-position,
                 direction, costume #,                                  direction, costume #,
                 costume name, size,                                    costume name, size,
                 volume, graphic                                        volume, graphic
                 effects, etc.                                          effects, etc.

                 All variables with                                     All variables with
                 scope For this                                         scope For this
                 sprite only                                            sprite only


           Figure 5-15: Clones inherit copies of their parent’s variables

                                           To illustrate, let’s say the parent sprite owns a variable named speed
                                      whose current value is 10. When you clone the parent, the new sprite will
                                      also have a variable named speed with the value 10. After that, if the parent
                                      sprite changes speed to 20, the value of speed in the clone will stay at 10.
               CloneIDs.sb2                You can use this concept to distinguish between clones in your applica-
                                      tions. For example, let’s look at the program in Figure 5-16.




                                                                                       The parent sprite and
                                                                                       its three clones, each
                                                                                       with its own unique ID




                                      Figure 5-16: Using variables to distinguish between clones




                                                                                                                            Variables   105




LTPWS_05_02.indd 105                                                                                                                 1/14/2014 4:22:06 PM
                                   The parent sprite in this example owns a variable named cloneID. When
                              the green flag is clicked, it starts a loop to create three clones, and it sets
                              cloneID to a different value (1, 2, or 3 in this case) before creating a clone.
                              Each clone comes to life with its own copy of cloneID initialized to a differ-
                              ent value. You could now use an if block, which we’ll study in depth in the
                              next chapter, to check for the clone’s ID and have it perform a correspond-
                              ing action.
                 ClonesAnd         Now, let’s discuss how clones can interact with global variables. Recall
             GlobalVars.sb2   from Figure 5-15 that variables with scope For all sprites can be read and
                              written by the Stage and all sprites, including clones. As an example, the
                              program in Figure 5-17 uses this fact to detect when all clones of the parent
                              sprite have disappeared.




                              Figure 5-17: Using a global variable to track when clones are deleted

                                  In this script, the parent sprite sets the global variable numClones to
                              5 and creates five clones. It then waits for numClones to become 0 before
                              announcing the end of the game. The clones appear at random times and
                              locations on the Stage, say “Hello!” for two seconds, and then disappear.
                              Before a clone is deleted, it decreases numClones by 1. When all five clones
                              are gone, numClones reaches 0, the main script stops waiting, and the origi-
                              nal sprite says “Game Over!”
                                  In the following section, you’ll learn about variables’ monitors, which
                              allow you to see, and even change, the current values stored in variables.
                              The ability to view and change a variable on the Stage will open the door
                              to creating totally new kinds of applications.


                  Displaying Variable Monitors
                              You’ll often find yourself wanting to see the current value stored in a vari-
                              able. For example, when one of your scripts doesn’t work as expected, you
                              might want to track some of its variables to see if they change correctly.
                              Using variable monitors can help you with this debugging task.
                                  You can display a Scratch variable on the Stage as a variable monitor.
                              Checking or unchecking the box next to a variable’s name allows you to
                              show or hide a variable’s monitor on the Stage, as illustrated in Figure 5-18.
                              You can also control a monitor’s visibility from within your script with the
                              show variable and hide variable commands.


            106   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 106                                                                                   1/8/2014 3:35:54 PM
                                  Monitor of the
                                  score variable


                               Figure 5-18: Show a variable’s monitor by checking the box
                               next to its name.

                                   Monitors can be used as readouts or controls, which display or allow
                               you to change a variable’s contents, respectively. Double-click the monitor’s
                               box on the Stage to choose a normal readout (the default state), large read-
                               out, or slider control. When you choose to display a slider, you can set its
                               range by right-clicking the slider and selecting the set slider min and max
                               option from the pop-up menu, as shown in Figure 5-19.




                               Figure 5-19: Setting the minimum and maximum values for a monitor in slider mode

              StageColor.sb2        Using a slider allows you to change the value of a variable while a script
                               is running, which is a convenient way for users to interact with your applica-
                               tion. You can see a simple example of using the slider control in Figure 5-20.




                               Figure 5-20: Adjusting Stage color with a slider

                                   In this example, dragging the slider’s handle changes the value of
                               the stageColor variable, which is a parameter in the set color effect to com-
                               mand. Assuming this script belongs to the Stage, dragging the slider should
                               change the Stage’s background color.

                                                                                                         Variables   107




scratch_book02.indb 107                                                                                            1/8/2014 3:35:55 PM
                      Note    A variable’s monitor also indicates its scope. If a variable belongs to one sprite, its
                              monitor should show the sprite name before the variable name. For example, the moni-
                              tor Cat speed 0 indicates that speed belongs to Cat. If the speed variable were a
                              global variable, its monitor would only say speed 0. The difference between the two
                              cases is illustrated in the following figure.

                                                                              This monitor indicates that the speed
                                                                              variable belongs to the Cat sprite.

                                                                               This monitor indicates that speed is
                                                                               a global variable.




                  Using Variable Monitors in Applications
                              Now that you know the basics behind variable monitors, I’ll show you some
                              ways you could use them to add some extra functionality to your Scratch
                              applications.
                                   The ability to use monitors as both displays and controls opens the
                              door for a wide range of applications, including games, simulations, and
                              interactive programs. Let’s explore some examples that make use of moni-
                              tors in the following subsections.

                              Simulating Ohm’s Law
               OhmsLaw.sb2    Our first example is a simulation of Ohm’s law. When a voltage (V ) is
                              applied across a resistor (R), a current (I) will flow through that resistor.
                              According to Ohm’s law, the amount of current is given by this equation:

                                                                             Voltage (V )
                                                        Current ( I ) =
                                                                            Resistance ( R )

                                   Our application allows the user to change the values of V and R using
                              slider controls. Then it calculates and displays the corresponding value of
                              the current, I. The user interface for this application is shown in Figure 5-21.



                                                   Current                                  The Light sprite
                                                   monitor                                  changes the brightness
                                                                                            of the bulb.



                                 Voltage
                                  control                      Resistance
                                                                 control                    Three sprites whose
                                                                                            sizes show the relation
                                                                                            between V, I, and R.




                              Figure 5-21: User interface for the Ohm’s law application


            108   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 108                                                                                               1/8/2014 3:35:55 PM
                               The slider for the battery voltage (V) has a range of [0, 10], and the
                          slider for the resistor (R) has a range of [1, 10]. When the user changes V
                          or R with the sliders, the application calculates the corresponding value of
                          the current (I) that flows in the circuit. The brightness of the bulb changes
                          in proportion to the value of the current passing through it: The higher the
                          current, the brighter the light bulb. The sizes of the V, I, and R letters in the
                          figure also change to indicate the relative values of these quantities.
                               In total, the application has five sprites
                          (named Volt, Current, Resistance, Equal, and
                          Light) and three variables (named V, I, and
                          R). Everything else you see in Figure 5-21
                          (the battery, wires, socket, and so on) is part
                          of the Stage’s backdrop image. The main
                          script that drives the application, which
                          belongs to the Stage, is shown Figure 5-22.
                               The script initializes the values of V and
                          R and then enters an infinite loop. On each
                                                                               Figure 5-22: Main script of
                          pass through the loop, it calculates I using
                                                                               Ohm’s law application
                          the present values of V and R, which are set
                          by the user through the slider controls. It
                          then broadcasts a message to the other sprites
                          in the application to update their appearance in relation to the calculated
                          values. Fig­ure 5-23 shows the response of the Volt, Current, Resistance, and
                          Light sprites (which show the letters V, I, R, and the light bulb, respectively)
                          when they receive the Update message.




                                 Script for the Volt sprite         Script for the Current sprite
                                (which shows the letter V )          (which shows the letter I )




                              Script for the Resistance sprite          Script for the Light sprite
                                (which shows the letter R)             (which shows the light bulb)

                          Figure 5-23: Scripts triggered in response to the Update message

                               When the Update broadcast is received, the Volt, Current, and Resistance
                          sprites change their size (from 100 percent to 200 percent of their original
                          size) in relation to the current values of their respective variables. The Light
                          sprite executes the set ghost effect to command to change its transpar-
                          ency level in proportion to the value of I. This gives the light bulb a realistic
                          visual effect that simulates an actual bulb.




                                                                                                      Variables   109




scratch_book02.indb 109                                                                                         1/8/2014 3:35:55 PM
                                                                 Try It Ou t 5-3

                                 Open the Ohm’s law simulator to run it, and study the scripts to understand how
                                 it works. What do you think would happen if you added the command change
                                 color effect by 25 at the end of the script for the Light sprite? Implement this
                                 change to check your answer. What are some ways you could enhance this
                                 application?



                              Demonstrating a Series Circuit
          SeriesCircuit.sb2   Our second example simulates a circuit that contains a battery and three
                              resistors connected in series. The user can change the battery voltage as
                              well as the resistor values using the sliders. The current that flows through
                              the resistors and the voltages across the three resistors are shown using
                              large display readouts. You can see the interface for the application in
                              Figure 5-24. (Note that the color bands on the resistors do not represent
                              the actual values of the resistors.)


                                                                                               I monitor

                                                                                               V1 monitor

                                                                                               V2 monitor




                                                      Slider                                   V3 monitor
                                                     controls




                              Figure 5-24: An application that demonstrates a series circuit

                                   The equations that govern the operation of this circuit are shown below.
                              We can calculate the current that flows in the circuit by dividing the battery
                              voltage, V, by the sum of the three resistances. After that, the voltage across
                              each resistor is calculated by multiplying the current by the value of that
                              resistor:
                                                     Total Resistance: R tot = R 1 + R 2 + R 3
                                                    Current through the circuit: I = V ÷ R tot
                                                         Voltage across R 1: V1 = I × R 1
                                                         Voltage across R 2: V2 = I × R 2
                                                         Voltage across R 3: V3 = I × R 3



           110   Chapter 5




LTPWS_05_02.indd 110                                                                                                1/14/2014 4:22:44 PM
                                     This application has no sprites,
                                but when the green flag is clicked, the
                                script shown in Figure 5-25, which
                                belongs to the Stage, is executed.
                                     This script takes care of the math
                                for us and displays the results in the
                                readouts on the Stage. Note that while
                                the slider controls for resistors R2 and
                                R3 can change from 0 to 10, the mini-
                                mum value for R1 was intentionally set
                                to 1. This ensures that Rtot is always
                                greater than 0 and lets us avoid divid-
                                ing by 0 when calculating the value of       Figure 5-25: Script that runs when the
                                the current.                                 green flag is clicked
                                     Most of the work for this applica-
                                tion went into designing the interface
                                (that is, the background of the Stage). After that, all we had to do was to
                                position the displays and sliders at the right locations on the Stage.



                                                                  Try It Ou t 5- 4
                SeriesCircuit      Open the series circuit simulator application and run it. Experiment with different
              WithSwitch.sb2       values of R1, R2, R3, and V. Watch the calculated values of V1, V2, and V3 as
                                   you drag the slider controls. What is the relationship between the voltage sum
                                   (V1 + V2 + V3) and the battery voltage? What does this tell you about the voltage
                                   relation in series circuits? You can make an interesting enhancement to the appli-
                                   cation by adding an image of a switch that opens or closes the circuit, as shown
                                   below. When the switch is open, no current will flow in the circuit. Try to imple-
                                   ment this change using the hints given below.

                                                                                                        Script for the
                                                                                                        Switch sprite



                                                                           Change how the main script calculates the current (I).



                                                                                                               Same as before
                                              Switch sprite has
                                               two costumes
                                                 (On, Off).
                                                                                                    Switch if Off. Set current to 0.




                                Visualizing a Sphere’s Volume and Surface Area
                   Sphere.sb2   Our third example is an interactive application for calculating the volume
                                and surface area of a sphere. The user changes the sphere’s diameter by
                                clicking some buttons on the user interface, and the application automati-
                                cally calculates and displays the corresponding volume and surface area.


                                                                                                                          Variables   111




scratch_book02.indb 111                                                                                                                1/8/2014 3:35:55 PM
                              To make the application more appealing, the size of the sphere displayed
                              on the Stage is also changed in proportion to the selected diameter. The
                              user interface for the application is illustrated in Figure 5-26.


                                                                                       Click the left and right arrows
                                                                                       to change the diameter of the
                                                                                       sphere.



                                                                                       The size of the sphere
                                                                                       changes with the selected
                                                                                       diameter.



                                                                                       The application automatically
                                                                                       calculates the volume (V ) and
                                                                                       surface area (S).



                              Figure 5-26: User interface for the sphere application

                                  The application contains three sprites: the two arrow buttons (named
                              Up and Down) and the sphere image (named Sphere). The scripts associated
                              with the two buttons broadcast a message to indicate that they have been
                              clicked, as shown in Figure 5-27.
                                 Script for the                  Script for the
                                 Down sprite                     Up sprite




                              Figure 5-27: Scripts for the Up and Down sprites

                                   The Sphere sprite has nine costumes that represent spheres with diam-
                              eters 1, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, ... , 3. When this sprite receives the Up or Down broad-
                              cast messages, it executes the scripts shown in Figure 5-28.




                              Figure 5-28: Scripts triggered by the Up and Down messages




            112   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 112                                                                                                  1/8/2014 3:35:56 PM
                               The sprite switches its costume and then calls the Recalculate proce-
                          dure to update the volume and surface area calculations. Note that these
                          scripts use the value of the current costume to determine whether the
                          sphere has reached its highest or lowest size, thus ensuring valid responses
                          to the Up and Down buttons. I’ll say more about the if block in the next
                          chapter, but for now, let’s discuss the sphere’s Recalculate procedure,
                          shown in Figure 5-29.




                          Figure 5-29: Recalculate procedure

                              First, the value of the diameter variable is set according to this formula:
                                               diameter = 1 + 0.25 × (costume number – 1)
                              Since the costume number ranges from 1 to 9, the corresponding val-
                          ues of the diameter variable will be 1, 1.25, 1.50, ... , 2.75, 3, which is what we
                          intended.
                              The script finds the radius, r, by dividing the diameter by 2. It then cal-
                          culates the volume and the surface area of the sphere using the formulas
                          shown in Figure 5-26. The computed values will show up automatically on
                          the corresponding monitors on the Stage.



                                                             Try It Ou t 5-5

                             Open the application and run it. Study the scripts to understand how the applica-
                             tion works. Add a script to the Sphere sprite so it rotates and changes color as the
                             application runs. As another exercise, modify the original program to use a single
                             costume for the Sphere sprite and use the change size by block to change the
                             sphere’s size. The scaled image won’t look as nice, but otherwise, the application
                             should perform identically.




                                                                                                        Variables   113




scratch_book02.indb 113                                                                                           1/8/2014 3:35:56 PM
                              Drawing an n-Leaved Rose
         N-LeavedRose.sb2     In this example, we’ll create an application that draws a rose with multiple
                              leaves on the Stage. The rose-drawing process can be broken down into the
                              following steps:

                              1.   Start at the origin of the Stage.
                              2.   Point the sprite in some direction. By convention, the Greek letter θ
                                   (pronounced theta) represents an angle, so we’ll name the variable
                                   for the sprite’s direction theta.
                              3.   Move the sprite r steps and draw a single point on the Stage. After that,
                                   lift the pen up and return to the origin.
                              4.   Change the angle theta by some amount (we’ll use 1°) and repeat
                                   steps 2–4.

                                   The relation between the distance r and the angle theta is given by
                                                                 r = a × cos(n × θ)
                              where a is a real number and n is an integer. This equation produces a rose
                              whose size and number of leaves are controlled by a and n, respectively. This
                              equation also involves the cosine trigonometric function (cos), which you’ll
                              find as a reporter block in the Operators palette (check the sqrt block). Given
                              the values of a and n, all we have to do is choose different values for theta,
                              calculate the corresponding values of r, and mark the resulting points on
                              the Stage. The user interface for this example is shown in Figure 5-30.




                              Figure 5-30: User interface for the n-leaved rose application

                                  The application contains two sprites: The first sprite has the Redraw but-
                              ton costume, and the second sprite (called Painter) is a hidden sprite that
                              draws the rose. The user controls the number of desired leaves by chang-
                              ing n with the slider control and then clicks the Redraw button to draw the



            114   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 114                                                                                   1/8/2014 3:35:56 PM
                          rose. When the user clicks that button, the button sprite simply broadcasts
                          a Redraw message. When the Painter sprite receives this message, it executes
                          the script shown in Figure 5-31.




                          Figure 5-31: The Redraw procedure for drawing an n-leaved rose on the Stage

                              The script first sets the pen’s color and size and clears the previous pen
                          marks from the Stage. It then sets the variable a to 100 and calls the Rose
                          procedure, which will run through a loop 360 times to draw the rose on
                          the Stage. On each pass of the loop, the procedure points in the direction
                          theta, moves r steps, and draws a pen mark at that location. It then incre-
                          ments theta by 1° to prepare for the next pass of the repeat loop.
                              Figure 5-32 shows some of the roses created for different values of n.
                          Can you figure out the relation between the value of n and the number of
                          leaves?




                               n=3              n=4              n=5               n=6

                          Figure 5-32: Some roses created by the Rose procedure



                                                           Try It Ou t 5-6

                             Open the application and run it. Change the value of n to see what else you can
                             create with the Rose procedure. Add another slider to the application to allow
                             the user to change the value of a and modify the scripts as needed. You can also
                             modify the Rose procedure to take a as a parameter. (See “Passing Parameters
                             to Custom Blocks” on page 77 for a refresher on how to add parameters to
                             procedures.)



                                                                                                      Variables   115




scratch_book02.indb 115                                                                                         1/8/2014 3:35:56 PM
                               Modeling Sunflower Seed Distribution
               Sunflower.sb2   Biologists and mathematicians have studied the arrangement of leaves on
                               the stems of plants extensively. Let’s delve into botany a bit ourselves by
                               examining a geometric model for representing flowers with spiral seed pat-
                               terns. In particular, we’ll program two equations that model the distribu-
                               tion of seeds in a sunflower. To draw the nth seed of the sunflower, we’ll
                               follow these steps:

                               1.   Point the sprite in the direction of n × 137.5°.
                               2.   Move a distance r = c n , where c is a constant scaling factor (set to 5 in
                                    our example).
                               3.   Draw a point on the Stage at the final location.

                                    We’ll repeat these steps for each seed we want to draw. For the first seed,
                               we set n = 1; for the second seed, we set n = 2; and so on. Using angles other
                               than 137.5° in the first step will result in different arrangements of seeds.
                               If you’re curious about these equations and want to learn more about sun­
                               flower seed patterns, check out The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants by Przemyslaw
                               Prusinkiewicz and Aristid Lindenmayer (Springer-Verlag, 2004), specifically
                               Chapter 4, which you’ll find on the book’s website, http://algorithmicbotany
                               .org/papers/#abop.
                                    Our application will generate patterns similar to the ones described in
                               that work, and you can see some of those patterns in Figure 5-33.




                               Figure 5-33: Some sunflower patterns generated using different angles

                                    The interface for this example contains a slider control to change the
                               value of the angle from 137° to 138° in increments of 0.01° and a button
                               labeled Redraw. When the user clicks that button, it broadcasts a message
                               to the Painter sprite, which executes the scripts shown in Figure 5-34.
                                    The Sunflower procedure executes a loop that draws 420 seeds, though
                               you can change this number if you like. On every iteration of the loop, the
                               procedure goes to the location of the nth seed (by calculating the seed’s
                               angle u and moving n v steps) and draws a pen mark at that location.
                               The procedure then increments n, which represents the seed number, to
                               prepare to draw the next seed.




            116   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 116                                                                                      1/8/2014 3:35:56 PM
                                                                                             
                                                                                               




                              Figure 5-34: The scripts for the Painter sprite

                                   The scripts I’ve presented in this section are just a few samples of
                              the amazing applications we can create by using variables and monitors.
                              Letting the user interact with our applications through the slider control is
                              just the start of a new breed of interactive applications. In the following sec-
                              tion, you’ll learn to create scripts that directly prompt users for input.


                                                                   Try It Ou t 5-7

                                 Open the application and run it. Change the value of the angle to see what else
                                 you can create with the Sunflower procedure. Study the procedure to under-
                                 stand how it works and then come up with some ways to enhance it.




                   Getting Input from Users
       GettingUserInput.sb2   Imagine that you want to create a game that tutors children in basic arith-
                              metic. Your game would probably have a sprite that displays an addition
                              problem and asks the player to enter an answer. How would you read the
                              player’s input to see whether the answer was correct?
                                   Scratch’s Sensing palette provides one command block, ask and wait,
                              that you can use to read user input. This block takes a single parameter that
                              specifies a string to show to the user, usually in the form of a question. As
                              illustrated in Figure 5-35, the execution of this block produces slightly differ-
                              ent outputs depending on the visibility state of the sprite (that is, whether
                              the sprite is shown or hidden). The output shown in Figure 5-35 (right)
                              also appears when the ask and wait command is called from a script that
                              is owned by the Stage.




                                                                                                         Variables   117




scratch_book02.indb 117                                                                                            1/8/2014 3:35:56 PM
                                                              Result of the ask and wait   Result of the ask and wait
                                                              command when the sprite      command when the sprite
                                                              is visible                   is hidden

                              Figure 5-35: The ask and wait block may produce different outputs depending
                              on whether the sprite that executes it is shown or hidden.

                                   After executing the ask and wait command, the calling script waits
                              for the user to press the enter key or click the check mark at the right side
                              of the input box. When this happens, Scratch stores the user’s input in the
                              answer block and continues execution at the command immediately after
                              the ask and wait block. To see this command block in action, take a look
                              at the following examples illustrating how to use it.

                              Reading a Number
                 AskAndWait   The script of Figure 5-36 asks the user for her age, waits for an answer, and
                       .sb2   tells the user how old she will be in 10 years.



                              
                              
                              

                                                                                     




                              Figure 5-36: A script that accepts the user’s age as input

                                  The figure shows the output of the program when the user types 18 and
                              presses enter on the keyboard. Notice that the program uses the join block
                              (from the Operators palette) to concatenate (that is, connect) two strings.

                              Reading Characters
               AskAndWait2    The script of Figure 5-37 asks the user for his initials and then constructs
                      .sb2    and displays a greeting based on the user’s response.



            118   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 118                                                                                                 1/8/2014 3:35:56 PM
                              Figure 5-37: A script that uses two variables to read in and
                              store the user’s initials

                                    The program uses two variables (firstInitial and lastInitial) to save the
                              v­ alues entered by the user. You can see the final output of the program
                               when the user enters the letters M and S at the two prompts, respectively.
                              Notice that the program uses nested join blocks to construct the greeting.
                              You can use this technique to create all sorts of strings and display custom-
                              ized messages in your applications.

                              Performing Arithmetic Operations
                AskAndWait3   The script of Figure 5-38 asks the user to input two numbers. It then com-
                       .sb2   putes the product of these two numbers and shows the answer in a voice
                              bubble using the say command. As in the previous example, the script uses
                              two variables (num1 and num2) to store the values entered by the user.




                              Figure 5-38: Computing a value based on user input

                                   The figure shows the output when the user enters 9 and 8, respectively,
                              in response to the two prompts. Again, notice that I’ve nested the join blocks
                              to construct the output string.
                                   The examples I’ve presented in this section demonstrate several ways
                              to use the ask and wait block to write scripts that take in user input and
                              solve a variety of problems. You can, for example, write a program to find
                              the roots of a quadratic equation of the form ax 2 + bx + c = 0 for any values
                              of a, b, and c entered by the user. You could then use this program to check
                              your own answer to the equation. I hope this will give you some ideas of
                              how to use this powerful block to solve any math problem that may arise.



                                                                                                   Variables   119




scratch_book02.indb 119                                                                                      1/8/2014 3:35:57 PM
                  Summary
                              Variables are one of the most important concepts in programming. A vari-
                              able is the name of an area in computer memory where we can store a
                              single value, such as a number or a string.
                                   In this chapter, you learned the basic data types supported in Scratch
                              and the operations permitted on these types. You then learned how to cre-
                              ate variables and use them to store a piece of data.
                                   You also implemented several practical applications that used variables
                              to demonstrate different features. You explored variables’ monitors and
                              used them to create different kinds of interactive programs. Finally, you
                              learned how to use the ask and wait block to prompt the user for some
                              input and process the user’s responses in your program.
                                   In the next chapter, you'll learn more about the Boolean data type and
                              the fundamental role it plays in decision making. You’ll also learn about the
                              if and the if/else blocks and use them to add another level of intelligence
                              to your Scratch programs. So roll up your sleeves and get ready for another
                              exciting chapter!


                  Problems
                              1.   Create a script that implements the following instructions:
                                   • Set the speed variable to 60 (mph).
                                   • Set the time variable to 2.5 (hours).
                                   • Calculate the distance traveled and save the answer in the distance
                                       variable.
                                   • Display the calculated distance, with an appropriate message, to
                                       the user
                              2.   What is the output of each of the scripts shown below? Reproduce these
                                   scripts and run them to test your answer.




            120   Chapter 5




scratch_book02.indb 120                                                                                 1/8/2014 3:35:57 PM
                          3.  What are the values of X and Y at the
                              end of each iteration of the repeat loop
                              in the script to the right? Reproduce the
                              script and run it to check your answer.
                          4. Let x and y be two variables. Create func-
                              tion blocks equivalent to the following
                              statements:
                              • Add 5 to x and store the result in y.
                              • Multiply x by 3 and store the result in y.
                              • Divide x by 10 and store the result in y.
                              • Subtract 4 from x and store the result in y.
                              • Square x, add y to the result, and store the result back in x.
                              • Set x equal to twice the value of y plus three times the cube of y.
                              • Set x equal to minus the square of y.
                              • Set x equal to the result of dividing the sum of x and y by the prod-
                                   uct of x and y.
                          5. Write a program that asks that user to enter an article, a noun, and
                              a verb. The program then creates a sentence of the form article
                              noun verb.
                          6. Write a program that asks the user to enter a temperature in degrees
                              Celsius. The program will convert the temperature to degrees Fahr­
                              enheit and display the result to the user with an appropriate message.
                              (Hint: F° = (1.8 × C°) + 32.)
                          7. When a current I flows through a resistance R, the power P dissipated
                                                    2
                              by the resistance is I × R. Write a program that reads I and R and cal-
                              culates P.
                          8. Write a program that reads the lengths of the two sides of a right tri-
                              angle and calculates the length of the hypotenuse.
                          9. Write a program that prompts the user to enter the length (L), width
                              (W ), and height (H) of a box. The program will then compute and dis-
                              play the volume and surface area of the box. (Hint: Volume = L × W × H;
                              Surface area = 2×[(L × W ) + (L × H) + (H × W )].)
                          10. The equivalent resistance R of three resistors (R 1, R 2, and R 3) con-
                              nected in parallel is given by this equation:
                                                    1/R = 1/R 1 + 1/R 2 + 1/R 3
                                   Write a program that reads the values of R 1, R 2, and R 3 and
                               calculates R.




                                                                                               Variables   121




scratch_book02.indb 121                                                                                  1/8/2014 3:35:57 PM
         Whac-a-Mole.sb2     11. Complete the Whac-a-Mole game introduced earlier in the chapter.
                                 The file Whac-a-Mole.sb2 contains a partial implementation of this pro-
                                 gram. When the green flag is clicked, the provided script starts a loop
                                 that moves the Cat sprite randomly over the holes. Add two scripts (one
                                 for the Cat and the other for the Stage) to change the values of the two
                                 variables (hits and misses) appropriately. Try adding some sound effects
                                 to make the game more fun! You could also add a condition that ends
                                 the game after a timer or the number of misses reaches a certain value.




           122   Chapter 5




LTPWS_05_02.indd 122                                                                                 1/17/2014 12:01:17 PM
Don't stop now...keep learning!

Buy the book or ebook at

nostarch.com/learnscratch

and use coupon code SCRATCH2 to get
40% off your purchase.
