                                 3
               AU T HOR I Z AT ION A ND
                ACCESS CONTROL S




            After you’ve received a party’s claim of iden-
           tity and established whether that claim is
          valid, as discussed in Chapter 2, you have to
       decide whether to allow the party access to your
resources. You can achieve this with two main con-
cepts: authorization and access control. Authorization
is the process of determining exactly what an authen-
ticated party can do. You typically implement autho-
rization using access controls, which are the tools and
systems you use to deny or allow access.
    You can base access controls on physical attributes, sets of rules, lists of
individuals or systems, or other, more complex factors. When it comes to
logical resources, you’ll probably find simple access controls implemented
in everyday applications and operating systems and elaborate, multilevel
                 configurations in military or government environments. In this chapter,
                 you’ll learn about access controls in more detail and look at some ways of
                 implementing them.


     What Are Access Controls?
                 Although the term access controls may sound technical, like it belongs only in
                 high-security computing facilities, we all deal with access controls daily.

                 •   When you lock or unlock the doors of your house, you’re using a form
                     of physical access control, based on your keys. (Your keys are something
                     you have, as discussed in Chapter 2; in this case, they function as meth-
                     ods of both authentication and authorization.)
                 •   When you start your car, you’re also likely to use a key. For some newer
                     cars, your key may even include an extra layer of security with radio-
                     frequency identification (RFID) tags, which are certificate-like identi-
                     fiers stored on the key.
                 •   Upon reaching your place of employment, you might use a badge
                     (again, something you have) to enter the building.
                 •   When you sit down in front of your computer at work and enter your
                     password (something you know), you’re authenticating yourself and
                     using a logical access control system to access the resources for which
                     you’ve been given permission.

                      Most of us regularly encounter multiple implementations like these
                 while working, going to school, and performing the other activities that
                 make up our day.
                      You’ll probably want to use access controls to carry out four basic tasks:
                 allowing access, denying access, limiting access, and revoking access. We can
                 describe most access control issues or situations using these four actions.
                      Allowing access is giving a party access to a given resource. For example,
                 you might want to give a user access to a file, or you may want to give an
                 entire group of people access to all the files in a given directory. You might
                 also allow someone physical access to a resource by giving your employees a
                 key or badge to your facility.
                      Denying access is the opposite of granting access. When you deny access,
                 you are preventing a given party from accessing the resource in question.
                 You might deny access to a person attempting to log onto a machine based
                 on the time of day, or you might block unauthorized individuals from enter-
                 ing the lobby of your building beyond business hours. Many access control
                 systems are set to deny by default.
                      Limiting access is allowing only some degree of access to your resources.
                 In a physical security scheme, you might have a master key that can open any
                 door in the building, an intermediate key that can open only a few doors,
                 and a low-level key that can open only one door. You might also implement




36   Chapter 3
        limited access when you’re using applications that may be exposed to attack-
        prone environments, like web browsers used on the internet.
            One way to limit access is by running sensitive applications in sandboxes,
        which are isolated environments containing a set of resources for a given
        purpose (Figure 3-1).
         Application 1 sandbox                 Application 2 sandbox

             Application 1                          Application 2




              App 1 data                            App 2 data



                                 Permissions




                             System resources:
                             Other applications
                             Network connectivity
                             Storage


        Figure 3-1: A sandbox is an isolated environment that protects
        a set of resources.

             We use sandboxes to prevent their contents from accessing files, mem-
        ory, and other system resources with which they shouldn’t be interacting.
        Sandboxes can be useful for containing things that you can’t trust, such as
        code from public websites. One example of a sandbox is the Java Virtual
        Machine (JVM) used to run programs written in the Java programming
        language. The JVM is specifically constructed to protect users against
        potentially malicious downloaded software.
             Revoking access is taking access away from a party after you’ve granted
        it. Being able to revoke access is vital to the security of your system. If you
        were, for instance, to fire an employee, you’d want to revoke any accesses
        they might have, including access to their email account, your virtual pri-
        vate network (VPN), and your facility. When you’re working with computer
        resources, it may be particularly important to be able to revoke access to a
        given resource quickly.


Implementing Access Controls
        The two main methods of implementing access controls are with access
        control lists and capabilities. Both of these methods have strengths and
        weaknesses, as well as different ways of carrying out the four basic tasks we
        covered earlier.



                                                                       Authorization and Access Controls   37
                 Access Control Lists
                 Access control lists (ACLs), often pronounced “ackles,” are lists containing
                 information about what kind of access certain parties are allowed to have to a
                 given system. We often see ACLs implemented as part of application software
                 or operating systems and in the firmware of some hardware appliances, such
                 as network infrastructure devices. We may even see ACL concepts extend into
                 the physical world, through software systems that control physical resources,
                 such as badge readers for door control systems. According to the ACL in
                 Figure 3-2, Alice is allowed access to the resource, while Bob is specifically
                 denied access.

                   Alice     Allow    
                   Bob       Deny     
                 Figure 3-2: A simple access
                 control list

                     This may seem like a simple concept, but in larger implementations,
                 ACLs can become quite complex. Organizations commonly use ACLs to
                 control access in the file systems on which their operating systems run and
                 to control the flow of traffic in the networks to which their systems are
                 attached. You’ll learn about these two types of ACLs in this chapter.

                 File System ACLs
                 The ACLs in most file systems will have three types of permissions (the
                 authorizations that allow access to specific resources in a specific manner):
                 read, which allows a user to access the contents of a file or directory; write,
                 which allows a user to write to a file or directory; and execute, which allows a
                 user to execute the contents of the file if that file contains either a program
                 or a script capable of running on the system in question.
                       A file or directory may also have multiple ACLs attached to it. In UNIX-
                 like operating systems, for instance, a given file might have separate access
                 lists for specific users or groups. The system might give a certain individual
                 user (like a specific developer) specific read, write, and execute permissions;
                 a certain group of users (like the entire developer group) different read,
                 write, and execute permissions; and any other authenticated users a third
                 set of read, write, and execute permissions. On Linux-based operating sys-
                 tems, you can view these three sets of permissions by issuing the following
                 command:

                 ls -la

                     Figure 3-3 shows these permissions displayed in the system.




38   Chapter 3
Figure 3-3: File permissions on a UNIX-like operating system

      Each line in Figure 3-3 represents the permissions for an individual
file. The permissions for the first file, ucf.conf, are displayed as follows:

 - r w - r - - r - -

    This may seem a bit cryptic. To interpret the permissions, it’ll help to
divide them into the following sections:

 - | r w - | r - - | r - -

     The first character generally represents the file type: - represents a
regular file, and d represents a directory. The second segment represents
the user who owns the file’s permissions and is set to r w -, meaning that the
user can read and write to the file but not execute it.
     The third segment, the group permissions, is set to r - -, meaning that
members of the group that was given ownership of the file can read it but
not write or execute it. The last segment, other, is also set to r - -, meaning
that anyone who is not the user who owns the file or in the group that owns
the file can also read it but not write or execute it. In Linux, the user per-
missions apply to a single user only, and the group permissions apply to a
single group.
     By using sets of file permissions, you can control access to the operating
systems and applications that use your file system. Most file systems use sys-
tems that are similar to the one described for assigning permissions.

Network ACLs
If you look at the variety of activities that take place on networks, both pri-
vate and public, you’ll notice ACLs regulating the activity. In network ACLs,
you typically filter access based on identifiers used for network transactions,


                                                           Authorization and Access Controls   39
                 such as Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, Media Access Control addresses,
                 and ports. You can see such ACLs at work in network infrastructure such as
                 routers, switches, and firewall devices, as well as in software firewalls, web-
                 sites like Facebook and Google, email, and other forms of software.
                      Permissions in network ACLs tend to be binary in nature; rather than
                 read, write, and execute, they generally either allow or deny some activity.
                 Instead of users, network ACLs typically grant permissions to traffic. For
                 example, when you set up the ACL, you use your chosen identifier or identi-
                 fiers to dictate which traffic you’re referring to and whether the traffic is
                 allowed. It’s best to rely on multiple identifiers to filter traffic, for reasons
                 that will become clear shortly.
                      Media Access Control address filtering is one of the simplest forms of
                 network-oriented ACLs. Media Access Control addresses are unique identi-
                 fiers hard-coded into each network interface in a given system.
                      Unfortunately, the software settings in most operating systems can
                 override a network interface’s Media Access Control address. Changing this
                 address is easy, so it’s not a good choice for a unique identifier of a device
                 on the network.
                      You could use IP addresses instead. Theoretically, an IP address is a
                 unique address assigned to each device on any network that uses the
                 Internet Protocol for communication. You can filter based on individual
                 addresses or an entire range of IP addresses. For instance, you could
                 allow the IP addresses 10.0.0.2 through 10.0.0.10 to pass traffic but deny
                 any traffic from 10.0.0.11 and higher. Unfortunately, like Media Access
                 Control addresses, you can falsify IP addresses, and they’re not unique to
                 a network interface. Additionally, IP addresses issued by internet service
                 providers are subject to frequent change, so making IP addresses the sole
                 basis for filtering is a shaky prospect at best.



                                                    BL ACK HOLE S

                     Some organizations, such as those that operate web servers, mail servers, and
                     other services exposed to the internet, apply large-scale filtering to block out
                     known attacks, spammers, and other undesirable traffic. Such filtering might
                     include dropping traffic from individual IP addresses, ranges of IP addresses,
                     or the entire IP spaces of large organizations, internet service providers, or
                     even entire countries. This practice is commonly called blackholing, because
                     from the user’s perspective, any traffic sent to filtered destinations appears to
                     have vanished into a black hole.




                     A third way of filtering traffic is by the port used to communicate over
                 the network. The network port is a numerical designation for one side of a
                 connection between two devices, and we use them to identify the application
                 to which traffic should be routed. Many common services and applications


40   Chapter 3
use specific ports. For instance, FTP uses ports 20 and 21 to transfer files,
Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) uses port 143 for managing email,
and Secure Shell (SSH) uses port 22 to manage remote connections to sys-
tems. There are many more examples, since there are 65,535 ports in all.
     You can control the use of many applications over the network by allow-
ing or denying traffic originating from or sent to any ports that you care to
manage. However, like Media Access Control and IP addresses, the specific
ports used for applications are conventions, not absolute rules. You can, with
relative ease, change the ports that applications use to entirely different ones.
     As you just saw, if you use any single attribute to construct a network
ACL, you’ll likely encounter a variety of issues. If you’re using IP addresses,
your attribute might not necessarily be unique. If you’re using Media Access
Control addresses, your attribute will be easy to alter, and if you use ports,
you’re banking on conventions rather than rules.
     When you combine several attributes, you begin to arrive at a more
secure technique. For example, it’s common to use both an IP address and
a port, a combination typically called a socket. Using sockets, you can allow
or deny network traffic from one or more IP addresses with one or more
applications on your network in a workable fashion.
     You can also construct ACLs to filter based on a wide variety of other
criteria. In some cases, you want to allow or deny traffic based on more spe-
cific information, such as the content of an individual packet or a related
series of packets. Using such techniques, you could, for example, filter out
traffic related to networks used to illegally share copyrighted material.

Weaknesses of ACL Systems
Systems that use ACLs to manage permissions are vulnerable to a type of
attack called the confused deputy problem. This problem occurs when the soft-
ware with access to a resource (the deputy) has a greater level of permission
to access the resource than the user who is controlling the software. If you
can trick the software into misusing its greater level of authority, you can
potentially carry out an attack.1
     Several attacks take practical advantage of the confused deputy problem.
These often involve tricking the user into taking some action when they
really think they are doing something else entirely. Many of these attacks
are client-side attacks, which take advantage of weaknesses in applications
running on the user’s computer. These attacks might be code sent through
the web browser and executed on the local machine, malformed PDF files,
or images and videos with attack code embedded. In the past several years,
software vendors have become increasingly aware of such attacks and have
begun building defensive measures into their software, but new attacks
appear on a regular basis. Two of the more common attacks that exploit
the confused deputy problem are cross-site request forgery (CSRF) and
clickjacking.
     CSRF is an attack that misuses the authority of the browser on the user’s
computer. If the attacker knows of, or can guess, a website that has already
authenticated the user—perhaps a common site such as Amazon.com—the


                                                     Authorization and Access Controls   41
                     attacker can embed a link in a web page or HTML-based email, generally
                     to an image hosted from a site controlled by the attacker. When the target’s
                     browser attempts to retrieve the image in the link, it also executes the addi-
                     tional commands the attacker has embedded in it, often in a fashion com-
                     pletely invisible to the target.
                          In the example in Figure 3-4, the attacker has embedded a request
                     to transfer funds from an account at BankCo to the attacker’s offshore
                     account. As the BankCo server sees the request as coming from an authen-
                     ticated and authorized user, it proceeds with the transfer. In this case, the
                     confused deputy is the bank server.
Time


 1. Attacker crafts request                   3. Target clicks link
 Attacker creates a request to transfer       The target, who is logged in to both
 $20,000 from a BankCo account to             the BankCo website and the website
 an offshore bank.                            where the request is stored, clicks the
                                              link leading to the attacker’s crafted
                                              request.


                        2. Attacker embeds request                    4. Bank transfers funds
                        Attacker embeds a link to the request         The bank, seeing the request coming
                        into a website.                               from a properly authenticated user,
                                                                      transfers $20,000 to the account
                                                                      specified in the request.


Figure 3-4: An example of a CSRF attack

                          Clickjacking, also known as user interface redressing, is a particularly sneaky
                     and effective client-side attack that takes advantage of some of the page ren-
                     dering features that are available in newer web browsers. To carry out a click-
                     jacking attack, the attacker must legitimately control or have taken control
                     of some portion of a website. The attacker constructs or modifies the site by
                     placing an invisible layer over something the client would normally click. This
                     causes the client to execute a command that’s different than the one they
                     think they’re performing. You can use clickjacking to trick the client into
                     making purchases, changing permissions in their applications or operating
                     systems, or performing other unwanted activities.

                     Capabilities
                     Whereas ACLs define permissions based on a given resource, an identity,
                     and a set of permissions, all generally held in a file of some sort, you can
                     also define permissions based on a user’s token, or key, otherwise known as
                     a capability. Although the token isn’t a physical object in most cases, you can
                     think of it as the badge you might use to open the door of a building. The
                     building has one door, and many people have a token that will open it, but




42   Chapter 3
        each person has a different level of access. One person might be able to
        access the building only during business hours on weekdays, while another
        person may have permission to enter the building at any time of day on any
        day of the week.
            In capability-based systems, the right to access a resource is based
        entirely on possession of the token, rather than who possesses it. If you
        were to give your badge to someone else, he would be able to use it to
        access the building with whatever set of permissions you have. When it
        comes to logical assets, applications can share their token with other
        applications.
            If you were to use capabilities instead of ACLs to manage permissions,
        you could protect against confused deputy attack. Neither of the attacks you
        learned about earlier, CSRF and clickjacking, would be possible, because
        the attacker wouldn’t be able to misuse the authority of the user unless they
        had access to the user’s token.


Access Control Models
        An access control model is a way of determining who should be allowed
        access to what resources. There are quite a few different access control
        models out there. The most common ones, covered here, include dis-
        cretionary access control, mandatory access control, rule-based access
        control, role-based access control, attribute-based access control, and
        multi­level access control.

        Discretionary Access Control
        In the discretionary access control (DAC) model, the owner of the resource
        determines who gets access to it and exactly what level of access they can
        have. You can see DAC implemented in most operating systems; if you
        decide to create a network share in a Microsoft operating system, for
        instance, you’re in charge of people’s access to it.

        Mandatory Access Control
        In the mandatory access control (MAC) model, the owner of the resource
        doesn’t get to decide who gets to access it. Instead, a separate group or
        individual has the authority to set access to resources. You can often find
        MAC implemented in government organizations, where access to a given
        resource is largely dictated by the sensitivity label applied to it (secret or top
        secret, for example), by the level of sensitive information the individual is
        allowed to access (perhaps only secret), and by whether the individual actu-
        ally has a need to access the resource (a concept called the principle of least
        privilege, discussed in the box).




                                                              Authorization and Access Controls   43
                                     THE PRINCIPLE OF LE A S T PRI V ILEGE

                     The principle of least privilege dictates that you should give a party only the
                     bare minimum level of access it needs to perform its functionality. For example,
                     someone working in an organization’s sales department should not need access
                     to data in the organization’s internal human resources system to do their job.
                     Violation of the principle of least privilege is at the heart of many of the security
                     problems we face today.
                          One of the more common ways the principle of least privilege gets
                     improperly implemented is in the permissions given to operating system user
                     accounts. In Microsoft operating systems in particular, you’ll often find that
                     casual users, who are performing tasks such as creating documents in word
                     processors and exchanging emails, are configured with administrative access,
                     allowing them to carry out any task that the operating system allows.
                          Because of this, whenever the over-privileged user opens an email attach-
                     ment containing malware or encounters a website that pushes attack code to
                     the client computer, these attacks have free rein on the system. The attacker
                     can simply turn off anti-malware tools, install any additional attack tools they
                     care to, and proceed with completely compromising the system.




                 Rule-Based Access Control
                 Rule-based access control allows access according to a set of rules defined by
                 the system administrator. If the rule is matched, access to the resource will
                 be granted or denied accordingly.
                     A good example of rule-based access control is an ACL used by a
                 router. You might see a rule specifying that traffic coming from source A
                 to destination B on port C is allowed. Any other traffic between the two
                 devices would be denied.

                 Role-Based Access Control
                 The role-based access control (RBAC) model allows access based on the role of
                 the individual being granted access. For example, if you have an employee
                 whose only role is to enter data into an application, RBAC would mandate
                 that you allow the employee access to only that application.
                     If you have an employee with a more complex role—customer service for
                 an online retailer, perhaps—the employee’s role might require him to have
                 access to information about customers’ payment status and information, ship-
                 ping status, previous orders, and returns. In this case, RBAC would grant him
                 considerably more access. You can see RBAC implemented in many large-
                 scale applications that are oriented around sales or customer service.




44   Chapter 3
Attribute-Based Access Control
Attribute-based access control (ABAC) is based on the specific attributes of a
person, resource, or environment. You can often find it implemented on
infrastructure systems, such as those in network or telecommunications
environments.
     Subject attributes belong to an individual. We could choose any number
of attributes, such as height in the classic “you must be this tall to ride”
access control in amusement park rides. Another common example of sub-
ject attributes are CAPTCHAs, or “completely automated public Turing tests
to tell humans and computers apart” (Figure 3-5).2 CAPTCHAs control
access based on whether the party on the other end can pass a test that is
(in theory) too difficult for a machine to complete.




Figure 3-5: A CAPTCHA, designed to prove that the user is human

     Resource attributes belong to a resource, such as an operating system
or application. You’ll often see access controlled by resource attributes,
although usually this is for technical reasons rather than security reasons;
some software runs only on a particular operating system, and some web-
sites work only with certain browsers. You might apply this type of access
control as a security measure by requiring someone to use specific software
or protocols for communication.
     You can use environmental attributes to enable access controls based on
environmental conditions. People commonly use time to control access to
physical and logical resources. Access controls on buildings often allow access
only during business hours. Many VPN connections have time limits that
force the user to reconnect every 24 hours to prevent users from keeping a
connection running after their authorization for using it has been removed.

Multilevel Access Control
Multilevel access control models combine several of the access control models
discussed in this section. They’re used when the simpler access control
models aren’t considered robust enough to protect the information



                                                        Authorization and Access Controls   45
                 to which you’re controlling access. Military and government organizations,
                 which handle data of a sensitive nature, often use multilevel access control
                 models to control access to a variety of data, from nuclear secrets to pro-
                 tected health information. You’ll learn about a few of these models now.

                 The Bell–LaPadula Model
                 The Bell–LaPadula model implements a combination of discretionary and
                 mandatory access controls (DAC and MAC) and is primarily concerned
                 with the confidentiality of the resource in question—in other words, mak-
                 ing sure unauthorized people can’t read it. Generally, in cases where you
                 see these two models implemented together, MAC takes precedence over
                 DAC, and DAC works within the accesses allowed by the MAC permissions.
                     For example, you might have a resource that is classified as secret and
                 a user who has a secret level of clearance; under a mandatory access model,
                 the user would have access to the resource. However, you might also have an
                 additional layer of DAC under the MAC access so that if the resource owner
                 has not given the user access, they would not be able to access it, despite the
                 MAC permissions. In Bell–LaPadula, two security properties define how
                 information can flow to and from the resource.3
                     The Simple Security Property The level of access granted to an
                     individual must be at least as high as the classification of the resource
                     in order for the individual to access it. In other words, an individual
                     cannot read a resource classified at a higher level, but they can read
                     resources at a lower level.
                     The * Property (or Star Property) Anyone accessing a resource can
                     only write (or copy) its contents to another resource classified at the
                     same level or higher.
                    You can summarize these properties as “no read up” and “no write
                 down,” respectively, as shown in Figure 3-6.

                                   Top Secret



                                     Secret
                 No read up                            No write down

                                  Confidential



                                  Unclassified


                 Figure 3-6: The Bell–LaPadula model

                     In short, this means that when you’re handling classified information,
                 you can’t read any higher than your clearance level, and you can’t write
                 classified data down to any lower level.


46   Chapter 3
The Biba Model
The Biba model of access control is primarily concerned with protecting
the integrity of data, even at the expense of confidentiality. That means it’s
more important to keep people from altering the data than from viewing it.
Biba has two security rules that are the exact opposite of those discussed in
the Bell–LaPadula model.4
    The Simple Integrity Axiom The level of access granted to an indi-
    vidual must be no lower than the classification of the resource. In other
    words, access to one level does not grant access to lower levels.
    The * Integrity Axiom (or Star Integrity Axiom) Anyone accessing a
    resource can only write its contents to a resource classified at the same
    level or lower.
     We can summarize these rules as “no read down” and “no write up,”
respectively, as shown in Figure 3-7. This means that assets that are of high
integrity (meaning they shouldn’t be altered) and assets that are of low integ-
rity are kept strictly apart.

                  Top Secret



                    Secret
No write up                      No read down

                 Confidential



                 Unclassified


Figure 3-7: The Biba model

     This may seem completely counterintuitive when it comes to protecting
information. However, these principles protect integrity by ensuring that
your resource can be written to only by those with a high level of access and
that those with a high level of access do not access a resource with a lower
classification. Consider an organization that performs both a low-integrity
process that collects (potentially malicious) PDF uploads from users and
a high-integrity process that scans document inputs from highly classified
systems. In the Biba model, the upload process wouldn’t be able to send
data to the scanning process, so it wouldn’t be able to corrupt the classified
input; on top of this, the scanning process would be unable to access the
low-level data, even if it was directed to.

The Brewer and Nash Model
The Brewer and Nash model, also known as the Chinese Wall model, is an access
control model designed to prevent conflicts of interest. Brewer and Nash is



                                                    Authorization and Access Controls   47
                 commonly used in industries that handle sensitive data, such as the finan-
                 cial, medical, or legal industries. This model considers three main resource
                 classes.5

                 •   Objects: Resources, such as files or information, pertaining to a single
                     organization
                 •   Company groups: All objects pertaining to an organization
                 •   Conflict classes: All groups of objects concerning competing parties

                     A commercial law firm that represents companies in a certain industry
                 might have files that pertain to various competing individuals and companies.
                 Since an individual lawyer at the firm accesses files for different clients, the
                 lawyer could potentially access confidential data that would generate a
                 conflict of interest. In the Brewer and Nash model, the level of access to
                 resources and case materials that the lawyer is allowed would dynamically
                 change based on the materials previously accessed (Figure 3-8).
                                            Conflict of interest


                                Client A case               Client B case
                                   materials                  materials

                  b
                 Lawyer         Client B case               Client A case
                                  materials                    materials

                 Figure 3-8: Brewer and Nash model

                     In this example, after the lawyer views Client A’s case materials,
                 the lawyer would no longer be able to access information pertaining to
                 Client B or any other parties competing with the current client, resolving
                 any conflicts of interest.


     Physical Access Controls
                 So far you’ve seen logical examples to illustrate the access control concepts
                 discussed in this chapter, but many of these methods apply to physical secu-
                 rity, as well. Let’s go over some examples of those now.
                      Physical access controls are often concerned with controlling the move-
                 ment of individuals and vehicles. Access controls for individuals typically
                 regulate their movement in and out of buildings or facilities, often using
                 badges that open a facility’s doors (something you have, from Chapter 2).
                 Door control systems that make use of badges frequently use ACLs in the
                 software that runs them to permit or deny access for certain doors and
                 times of day.
                      One of the more common security issues with regulating people’s access
                 into buildings is tailgating, which occurs when you authenticate your physical
                 access control measure, such as a badge, and another person follows directly

48   Chapter 3
behind you without also being authenticated. Tailgating can cause a variety
of issues, including creating an inaccurate representation of who is in the
building in the case of emergencies.
     We can attempt to solve tailgating in a variety of ways, including imple-
menting a policy that forbids it, posting a guard in the area, or simply (but
expensively) installing a physical access control solution that allows only
one person to pass through at a time, such as a turnstile. All of these are
reasonable solutions, but, depending on the environment in question, they
may or may not be effective. You’ll often find that a combination of several
solutions works better than any single one.
     A much more complex example of a physical access control is the security
system in use at many airports. After the terrorist attacks of September 11,
2001, in the United States, the level of security at airports increased. Once
you’ve entered the airport security system, you are required to present a
boarding pass and identification (something you have, times two). You typi-
cally pass through several steps to ensure that you’re not carrying any danger-
ous devices—a form of attribute-based access control. You then proceed to
your gate and, once again, present your boarding pass before stepping on the
airplane. Such processes may differ slightly depending on the country, but
they’re generally the same from an access control perspective.
     Physical access control for vehicles often revolves around keeping said
vehicles from moving through unauthorized areas, typically using various
simple barriers, including Jersey barriers (Figure 3-9), bollards, one-way
spike strips, and fences. You may also see more complex installations that
include staffed or unstaffed rising barriers, automated gates or doors, and
other similar controls.




Figure 3-9: A Jersey barrier

    There are, of course, a huge number of other physical access controls
and methods. Additionally, when referring to physical access control devices,
or access controls in general, the line between an authentication device and
an access control device often becomes rather blurry, or overlaps entirely.
For example, a key for a physical lock could be considered identification,


                                                    Authorization and Access Controls   49
                 authentication, and authorization, all the while being a component of a
                 physical access control. Often these terms are used inaccurately or inappro-
                 priately, even within the security field, which does not help matters.


     Summary
                 Authorization is a key step in the process of allowing parties to access
                 resources—in other words, the identification, authentication, and autho-
                 rization process. You implement authorization by using access controls.
                 Typically, you use one of two access control methods: access control lists or
                 capabilities. Although capabilities can provide safeguards against confused
                 deputy attacks, they’re not implemented as often as they should be.
                      When putting together an access control system, you use an access con-
                 trol model that outlines who should be given access to what resources. In
                 our daily lives, we often encounter simpler access control models, such as
                 discretionary access control, mandatory access control, role-based access
                 control, and attribute-based access control. Environments that handle more
                 sensitive data, such as those involved in the government, military, medical,
                 or legal industry, typically use multilevel access control models, including
                 Bell–LaPadula, Biba, and Brewer and Nash.
                      The next chapter will discuss auditing and accountability, which is
                 how you keep track of the activities that have taken place after you’ve gone
                 through the process of identification, authentication, and authorization.


     Exercises
                 1.  Discuss the difference between authorization and access control.
                 2.  What does the Brewer and Nash model protect against?
                 3.  Why does access control based on the Media Access Control address of
                     the systems on our network not represent strong security?
                 4. Which should take place first, authorization or authentication?
                 5. What are the differences between the MAC and DAC models of access
                     control?
                 6. The Bell–LaPadula and Biba multilevel access control models both have
                     a primary security focus. Can these two models be used together?
                 7. If you have a file containing sensitive data on a Linux operating system,
                     would setting the permissions to rw-rw-rw- cause a potential security
                     issue? If so, which portions of the CIA triad might be affected?
                 8. Which access control model could you use to prevent users from logging
                     into their accounts after business hours?
                 9. Explain how the confused deputy problem could allow users to carry
                     out activities for which they are not authorized.
                 10. What are some of the differences between access control lists and
                     capabilities?


50   Chapter 3
