        Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such




     SENSOR MACHINE LE ARNING
                                     9
     The greatest enemy of knowledge is not ignorance; it is the illusion of knowledge.
                                 —Stephen Hawking




             This is the final frontier! There is noth-
            ing between the sensor and the real world,
           and it doesn’t get any edgier than this. If you
        thought that microprocessors were resource-
constrained, wait until you try to run machine learning
algorithms on a sensor. You know somewhere a devel-
oper is attempting to port DOOM to a sensor, just to see
if they can.
    Before exploring what you can achieve with sensor ML, we need to
explain how we ended up here. This chapter provides a brief recap of sen-
sor evolution and explains why some of the methods you have already used
to process sensor data are not always sufficient. You will learn about the
common sensor ML algorithms and build a project that uses these tech-
niques to raise an alert when it detects an anomaly in the movement of a
robot arm.
      The Rise of Sensor Intelligence
                   For a long time, sensors were the silent partners of embedded systems.
                   A thermocouple crossed a threshold; a relay toggled. An accelerometer
                   spiked; an alarm fired. The logic was simple, deterministic, and hardwired.
                   The sensor itself had no opinion about what was happening. You explored
                   the evolution of smart sensors in Chapter 6.
                        Then, the data got harder. An IMU tracking human motion produces
                   continuous, high-frequency output across three axes. A gas sensor respond-
                   ing to volatile organic compounds in a noisy industrial environment gener-
                   ates unpredictable signals. Processing this kind of data in real time, at the
                   edge, exposed the limits of hard-coded logic and simple filters.
                        The first serious response was sensor fusion. By combining data from
                   multiple sources, such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers,
                   it became possible to produce more accurate estimates of orientation and
                   movement than from any single sensor alone. But while fusion improved
                   accuracy and resilience, it remained fundamentally a statistical process gov-
                   erned by static models. What if the patterns in the sensor data weren’t just
                   noise or drift but signals that could reveal deeper insights about user intent,
                   device health, environmental conditions, or even human behavior?
                        This is where sensor ML steps in. Instead of programming a device to
                   react to predefined thresholds or rules, you enable it to learn from data.
                   The embedded system no longer simply fuses inputs; it recognizes patterns,
                   predicts outcomes, and adapts to context. Machine learning allows sensor-
                   rich systems to classify activities, detect anomalies, anticipate failures, and
                   personalize responses.
                        Fitness trackers can count steps using a crude threshold on acceleration
                   data. But when the same sensor data is fed through a trained ML model,
                   the device can distinguish between walking, running, cycling, climbing
                   stairs, and even dancing—all using the same accelerometer. The intelli-
                   gence lies in the pattern of movement, not the absolute values. And because
                   the model is trained from real-world examples, it can adapt to the nuances
                   of each user.
                        The same principle applies in industrial settings. A vibration sensor
                   mounted on a motor might register subtle shifts in amplitude or frequency
                   long before a mechanical fault is visible. A traditional system would miss
                   these changes as insignificant or noisy. But an ML model trained on histori-
                   cal failure data can learn to detect the early signatures of bearing wear or
                   misalignment, enabling intervention before catastrophic failure. In both
                   cases, the sensor system shifts from passive observation to active interpreta-
                   tion, processing raw data into actionable information at the edge, without
                   cloud connectivity or human oversight.
                        This chapter explores how sensor ML builds on the foundations of sen-
                   sor fusion and embedded AI to deliver intelligent behavior. It explains the
                   workflow required to train and deploy models on embedded platforms, the
                   types of problems that sensor ML is particularly suited for, and the practi-
                   cal constraints that must be addressed. Finally, you will construct a project



270    Chapter 9
                  Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

        that can recognize movement anomalies in a robot arm, demonstrating how
        data collected from sensors can become a source of embedded intelligence.


Why Traditional Methods Are Insufficient
        Classical signal processing and sensor fusion techniques such as Kalman
        filters, complementary filters, and statistical thresholding have long served
        as the foundation of embedded sensing. These methods work well enough
        in controlled environments where sensor noise is minimal, relationships
        between variables are linear, and system dynamics are well understood.
        However, these methods depend on assumptions that increasingly break
        down as systems grow more complex, more autonomous, and more exposed
        to real-world variability.
             At the core of traditional methods lies a dependency on models that
        must be defined explicitly. As seen in the previous chapter, Kalman filters
        require a priori knowledge of the system’s state-space model, including
        accurate noise covariance matrices and transition dynamics. In practice,
        this level of precision is rarely achievable. Sensors are subjected to varying
        temperatures, humidity, and electromagnetic interference. Their outputs
        may degrade over time or respond nonlinearly to physical inputs. Under
        such conditions, handcrafted models often fail to represent the true behav-
        ior of the system, leading to poor estimation accuracy or instability.
             Figure 9-1 illustrates this concept. A Kalman filter tuned for Gaussian
        noise performs well under those conditions but deteriorates sharply when
        the noise profile changes to impulse noise. An ML-based approach, trained
        on diverse noise conditions, generalizes more effectively and tracks the true
        signal more closely.




        Figure 9-1: A plot illustrating that a Kalman filter optimized for Gaussian noise struggles
        with impulse noise, while an ML model can adapt

             Think about the challenge of controlling an autonomous drone
        through a dense urban environment. A classical approach would combine
        IMU data with GPS and barometric pressure, filtered through a sensor
        fusion algorithm. But what happens when GPS signals become unreliable
        due to multipath reflections or occlusion? Or when rapid movements,
        airframe damage, and vibrations introduce nonlinearities that the filter


                                                                           Sensor Machine Learning   271
                                  Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

                   cannot model? Traditional algorithms struggle in these edge cases, requir-
                   ing excessive tuning or additional failsafe logic that increases complexity
                   without guaranteeing robustness.
                        Replace a sensor on a production line, and your carefully calibrated
                   Kalman filter may need to be retuned from scratch. Change the operat-
                   ing environment, and the noise covariance matrices become invalid.
                   Traditional algorithms do not adapt; they must be explicitly recalibrated.
                   ML models sidestep this problem by learning directly from data. They cap-
                   ture the statistical structure of the signal, not the calibration assumptions
                   of a specific deployment, and can be retrained when conditions change.
                        Traditional methods have an undeniable advantage in simplicity: A
                   Kalman filter is fast and uses kilobytes of RAM. But for problems where
                   those methods produce inadequate results, the alternative has historically
                   been to move computation off-device. Techniques such as quantization,
                   pruning, and knowledge distillation have changed this. They allow ML
                   models to run on microcontrollers at inference costs that, while higher
                   than a simple filter, remain within the power and latency budgets of bat-
                   tery-operated edge devices.


      Machine Learning Models Commonly Used with Sensors
                   So which models work at the sensor layer? The answer depends on the data,
                   the task, and the hardware budget. Here are some of the workhorses.
                        When interpretability and fast inference matter more than raw accu-
                   racy, tree-based models are a good place to start. Decision trees are simple
                   to deploy and inspect. Their ensemble variants—random forests and gradi-
                   ent-boosted trees (such as XGBoost or LightGBM)—improve accuracy while
                   retaining much of that transparency.
                        You could deploy random forest on an agricultural sensor node to
                   classify soil conditions based on moisture, temperature, and pH readings.
                   LightGBM has been used in smart irrigation systems to learn watering
                   schedules from historical weather and soil sensor data, reducing water use
                   while maintaining yield.
                        For binary classification tasks, particularly anomaly detection, support
                   vector machines (SVMs) remain effective. You first met these in Chapter 3.
                   SVMs are computationally light at inference time, which makes them attrac-
                   tive for resource-constrained deployments where the classification bound-
                   ary is well defined. For example, in industrial condition monitoring, SVMs
                   have been applied to vibration and acoustic sensor data to detect early signs
                   of bearing failure. A linear SVM can be used on time-domain features
                   extracted from accelerometer signals to identify machine faults with high
                   precision.
                        For problems involving time-series data or sequential dependencies,
                   recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and their more robust variants, such as
                   long short-term memory (LSTM) networks, are a natural fit (see Chapter 4
                   for a deeper treatment of neural network architectures). These models
                   learn temporal patterns, making them ideal for motion recognition, speech


272    Chapter 9
                  Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

         detection, or battery state-of-charge estimation. A practical example is
         wearable activity recognition, where LSTMs are trained on IMU data to
         classify activities such as walking, running, or cycling. In one healthcare
         project, an LSTM was deployed on an Arm Cortex-M4 microcontroller to
         monitor Parkinson’s tremors in real time using wrist-worn sensors, enabling
         patients to track symptom severity outside clinical settings.
              More recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
         adapted for sensor data, particularly when signals are represented in the
         frequency domain or as images. For instance, environmental sound clas-
         sification tasks often convert microphone signals into spectrograms, allow-
         ing CNNs to detect events such as breaking glass, alarms, or animal calls.
         The Edge Impulse platform has showcased such models running efficiently
         on microcontrollers like the STM32 series, enabling real-time audio scene
         understanding on battery-powered edge devices.
              Labeled fault data is often scarce. You may have thousands of hours
         of normal operation recorded but only a handful of actual failures.
         Autoencoders are designed for exactly this situation. They learn to com-
         press and reconstruct normal sensor behavior. When an input deviates from
         that learned baseline, the reconstruction error spikes, signaling an anomaly
         without the need for labeled examples of every possible fault. This tech-
         nique has been used in smart factories to catch early drift in motor currents
         or temperature profiles. On embedded hardware, a standard autoencoder
         with a narrow bottleneck layer is practical to deploy; the more complex vari-
         ational autoencoder (VAE) adds a probabilistic latent space but is harder to
         justify given the additional memory and compute overhead.
              For low-power, interpretable applications, k-nearest neighbors (KNN)
         remains a surprisingly effective option. Although memory intensive in its
         vanilla form, optimizations such as prototype selection and quantized fea-
         ture storage enable KNN to run in real time on devices like the Arduino
         Nano 33 BLE Sense. It has been used in gesture recognition by comparing
         real-time IMU feature vectors against a known library of gestures.
              The models surveyed here share a common trait: They have all been
         successfully deployed on microcontroller-class hardware for real-time sen-
         sor tasks. The field is not standing still. Transformer- and attention-based
         architectures, once confined to the cloud, are being compressed for edge
         deployment through techniques such as token pruning and linear attention
         approximations. But for the project that follows, we will use a decision tree,
         the simplest and most interpretable model in this list, deployed directly on
         an IMU to detect movement anomalies in a robot arm.


Project 15: Robot Arm Anomaly Detection
         Pick-and-place robots are ubiquitous in automated assembly, and
         unplanned downtime is expensive. In this project, you will build a sensor-
         based machine learning system that monitors a robot arm’s movement and
         raises an alert when it detects behavior consistent with a developing fault.
         The test platform is a 6-DOF arm kit driven by six MG996R digital servos


                                                                      Sensor Machine Learning   273
                  (Figure 9-2). An Arduino UNO sends movement commands to the servos
                  through a Pololu Maestro six-channel servo controller, while an ISM330BX
                  IMU mounted on the arm captures the motion data used for both model
                  training and anomaly detection.


                                                                                                     Wrist roll
                                                                            Wrist pitch


                                                                            Elbow
                                                                                                    Gripper

                                                                                                 Shoulder

                                                                                                  Waist



                  Figure 9-2: A 6-DOF robot arm kit




                                                     W HAT IS 6-DOF ?

                      6-DOF stands for six degrees of freedom. This refers to the number of indepen-
                      dent movements the arm can make in 3D space. Each degree of freedom cor-
                      responds to a specific type of motion, either translational (movement along an
                      axis) or rotational (rotation about an axis). This configuration allows a 6-DOF
                      robot arm to position its gripper anywhere within its working envelope and ori-
                      ent it in any direction. The human arm also exhibits six degrees of freedom.



                       A block diagram of the robot arm control and monitoring system
                  is provided in Figure 9-3. The robot control algorithms will run on the
                  Arduino UNO and control the arm servos using a servo controller. The
                  IMU will be monitored via an ST evaluation kit using ST MEMS-Studio
                  running on a PC.

                                                      Anomaly alert


                                                Rx         5V                               ARM’s IMU
                                     Arduino                          6 × Servo motors
                      PC                                  Servo
                                      UNO                                                 6-DOF robot arm
                                                Tx      controller

                  Figure 9-3: An anomaly detection block diagram




274   Chapter 9
         Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

What You’ll Learn
By the end of this project, you will have built a working anomaly detection
system that runs entirely on the sensor, with no inference load on the host
microcontroller. Along the way, you’ll learn how to:
•   Control a multi-servo robotic arm and program repeatable movement
    sequences.
•   Collect and label IMU sensor data for both normal and anomalous
    operating conditions.
•   Train a decision-tree-based model using ST’s MEMS-Studio.
•   Deploy the trained model to the ISM330BX’s machine learning core
    (MLC), a dedicated hardware block inside the sensor that evaluates
    decision trees at the IMU’s output data rate.
    The MLC is what makes this project distinct from a conventional
TinyML deployment. The intelligence does not run on the Arduino. It runs
on the sensor itself.

Parts List
Apart from the IMU evaluation kit, all the other parts can be substituted
with generic equivalents. This is what you will need:
•   6-DOF robot arm kit with six MG996R servos
•   Pololu Maestro six-channel servo controller
•   Arduino UNO
•   ISM330BX IMU evaluation kit (MKI245KA + MKI109V3 motherboard)
•   5 V, 15 A regulated power supply (for example, MEAN WELL
    LRS-75-5)
•   USB cable and serial connection leads
•   PC running macOS, Windows, or Linux
•   Servo cables and hookup wire
    There are several 6-DOF robot arm kits available; do an internet search
and look for something like Figure 9-2. The robot arm uses six MG996R
high-torque digital servo motors. The key specifications of this servo are
provided in Table 9-1.

Table 9-1: MG996R Servo Motor Key Specifications
Specification         Value
Torque                9.4 kg • cm at 4.8 V, 11 kg • cm at 6.0 V
Speed                 0.17 s/60 degrees at 4.8 V, 0.14 s/60 degrees
                      at 6.0 V
Operating voltage     4.8 V to 7.2 V

                                                           (continued)


                                                             Sensor Machine Learning   275
                  Table 9-1: MG996R Servo Motor Key Specifications (continued )
                   Specification         Value
                   Stall current         2.5 A at 6 V
                   Running current       500 to 900 mA
                   Rotation range        Approx. 120 degrees total
                   Weight                55 g
                   Dimensions            40.7 × 19.7 × 42.9 mm


                       To estimate the required capacity of the 5 V power supply for six
                  MG996R servos operating simultaneously, assume a worst-case scenario
                  where all six approach stall conditions during peak load. The stall current
                  is quoted at 2.5 A at 6 V, and for 5 V the estimate is 2.3 A:

                                      Total peak current = 6 × 2.3 = 13.8 A

                       Based on this, we have specified a 5 V servo power supply rated at 15 A
                  to allow some margin for error. The LRS-75-5 (Figure 9-4) that we sourced
                  is a beefy supply and requires you to connect the 110-240 VAC cable, which
                  leaves these terminals exposed! After connection, cover the high-voltage
                  terminals with an insulator.




                  Figure 9-4: The MEAN WELL LRS-75-5 (5 V, 15 A) power supply



  WARNING         High-voltage caution! Use a different supply with the input voltage cable already con-
                  nected if you are not qualified to connect 110/240 VAC. This is a potentially lethal
                  voltage. A suitably rated bench power supply would be an alternative.




276   Chapter 9
          Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

Tools and Software Setup
Install the Arduino IDE and then the Pololu Maestro and AltSoftSerial
libraries using the Library Manager. On your PC, install ST’s MEMS-
Studio, which provides configuration tools, data logging, visualization, and
ML features for ST sensors. In this project, you’ll use MEMS-Studio for con-
figuring the ISM330BX sensor parameters, logging IMU data during arm
movement, and training the MLC decision tree. The software also includes
AlgoBuilder and other analysis tools, but these are not required for this
project. Links to the software downloads are provided in Appendix A.
     Once installed, connect the MKI109V3 motherboard via USB and
confirm that MEMS-Studio detects the ISM330BX. If the sensor appears
in the device list, your setup is ready. If not, check that the USB drivers are
installed and that the MKI245KA adapter board is properly seated on the
motherboard.



         W H Y THE SOF T WARE SERIAL LIBR ARY ISN’T USED

    For the Pololu Maestro Arduino library examples, we suggest using
    SoftwareSerial when controlling with an UNO. Ideally, use an MCU with
    multiple hardware serial ports, but if you are using an UNO, then use the
    AltSoftSerial library, which offers several advantages over SoftwareSerial.
    It provides true full-duplex communication, which means it can transmit and
    receive simultaneously without needing to switch between listening modes.
    Unlike SoftwareSerial, which disables interrupts during transmission and can
    interfere with timing-sensitive tasks, AltSoftSerial uses hardware timers to main-
    tain accurate timing with minimal CPU overhead. As a result, it produces fewer
    errors and dropped characters, particularly at higher baud rates. The trade-off
    is that AltSoftSerial works only on fixed pins: transmit on pin 9 and receive on
    pin 8 for the UNO. The biggest advantage from your perspective is that you
    can test whether it is working! Because SoftwareSerial is half-duplex, you can’t
    send and receive in a loopback configuration. Try this with the echo example
    from the book repo (c09001​.i­ no) to test serial transmission; connect pin 8 to pin 9
    when doing this.




Setup and Configuration
Mount the ISM330BX on the forearm segment near the gripper. This posi-
tion captures the largest range of motion across the most joints, which pro-
duces the most distinctive signatures for anomaly detection. If your cable
length doesn’t reach the gripper, the elbow joint is an acceptable alterna-
tive, but you may need to adjust the MLC decision tree thresholds during
training. Use double-sided tape for mounting. The IMU must be firmly
attached, as a loose joint will cause errors.


                                                                    Sensor Machine Learning   277
                      Connect each servo to the correct channel on the Maestro controller
                  using the information in Tables 9-2 and 9-3. The Maestro communicates
                  with the Arduino using serial communication, with wiring as detailed in
                  Figure 9-5. As part of the first step of the build (see “Control the Arm” on
                  page XX), you will verify that each servo moves correctly before continuing.

                          TX
                                                                            Servo power
                                                       RX



                                                                                       Servo controller

                                                                                       Channel 0 (waist)
                                                                                       Channel 1 (shoulder)
                                                               RESET                   Channel 2 (elbow)
                                                       TX
                                                               RX                      Channel 3 (wrist pitch)
                                                       5V                              Channel 4 (wrist roll)
                                                               GND
                                                                                       Channel 5 (gripper)




                                                                            S + –
                                                                       Connection to servos

Figure 9-5: Connecting the Arduino UNO to the Maestro servo controller

                      If you need to troubleshoot individual servos, the Pololu Maestro Control
                  Center software allows you to drive each channel manually from a PC. This
                  can be useful for verifying that a servo responds before writing Arduino code.

                  Table 9-2: Servo Channel Map and Code Label
                   Maestro channel     Joint            Code label
                   0                   Base rotation    WAIST
                   1                   Shoulder         SHOULDER
                   2                   Elbow            ELBOW
                   3                   Wrist pitch      WRIST_PITCH
                   4                   Wrist roll       WRIST_ROLL
                   5                   Gripper          GRIPPER




278   Chapter 9
           Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

    When connecting the arm servos to the controller, use Table 9-3 to
identify the correct wires. The MG996R servos generally use the JR conven-
tion: orange (signal), red (power), brown (ground).

Table 9-3: Servo Cable Connections by Manufacturer
Manufacturer      Signal (PWM)   V+ (power)   GND (ground)
Futaba            White          Red          Black
JR                Orange         Red          Brown
Hitec             Yellow         Red          Black
TowerPro          Orange         Red          Brown
Spektrum          Orange         Red          Brown


     Connect the 5 V, 15 A supply directly to the Maestro’s servo power rail.
The Maestro’s logic can be powered from the Arduino UNO’s +5 V pin.
Ensure the servo power jumper on the Maestro is removed so that servo
power and logic power are on separate rails. Connect all grounds together:
the UNO ground, the Maestro ground, and the power supply ground.
     There are several moving parts to get right here. The build steps that
follow take you through them one at a time: servo control first, then data
collection, model training, and on-sensor deployment. Each step includes
a verification check so you can confirm that everything works before mov-
ing on.

Control the Arm
You need to write some code to control the robot arm. To be more specific,
you must write a sketch that sends commands to the Maestro servo control-
ler, which will then drive the servos on the robot arm to the desired posi-
tion. Sending commands is easy, as Pololu has written an Arduino library
for this purpose.
     Servo motors, such as the MG996R, are controlled using pulse-width
modulation (PWM). A PWM signal consists of a repeating pulse, typically
every 20 milliseconds (a frequency of 50 Hz), where the width of the pulse
determines the servo position (Figure 9-6).




                                                               Sensor Machine Learning   279
                  Duty cycle = pulse width / period = 5%
                  Voltage
                                                pulse width = 1 ms

                        5                                                                         0º


                                       20 ms                                            Time
                                      (50 Hz)        period = 20 ms
                  Duty cycle = 7.5%
                   Voltage
                                                pulse width = 1 ms                              90º

                        5


                                      20 ms                                             Time

                  Duty cycle = 10%
                   Voltage
                                  pulse width = 2 ms
                                                                                               180º




                                      20 ms                                             Time

                  Figure 9-6: Servo control using pulse width to encode position (not to scale)

                      The Pololu Maestro Servo Controller generates these pulses and can
                  be controlled from an Arduino using the Pololu Maestro library via a serial
                  interface. The Arduino communicates with the Maestro at 9600 baud and
                  with the Serial Monitor at 115200 baud. These are independent serial con-
                  nections running at different rates. The Maestro sends pulses to the servo
                  pin every 20 ms by default. You can configure the servo pulse period, speed,
                  and acceleration limits via software.
                      Within the Pololu Maestro library, there is a setTarget() command that
                  takes two parameters: the channel and the position. Channel refers to
                  the servo channel number (0–5), and position is the desired pulse width.
                  Typical servos respond to target position values of 4000 to 8000 (Table 9-4).

                  Table 9-4: Servo Angle Mapping for the Pololu Maestro
                  Servo Controller
                   Maestro position value        Pulse width (µs)    Servo angle (degrees)
                   4000                          1000                0
                   6000                          1500                90
                   8000                          2000                180


                      The Maestro represents pulse widths in units of 0.25 µs. A target value
                  of 6000 corresponds to 6000 × 0.25 = 1500 µs, which places the servo at its


280   Chapter 9
         Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

center position. This allows for very fine control with 0.25 μs resolution,
though most servos cannot physically respond to this level of precision. For
example, to move a servo in an Arduino sketch, use:

// moves servo 0 to its        center   position   (1.5   ms     pulse)
servoController.setTarget(0,   6000);

     The setTarget() command sends a position value of 6000 (1500 μs) to
servo channel 0. The Maestro then handles timing, pulse generation, and
regulation of motion, offloading this real-time task from the Arduino.
     Upload test sketch c09002​.­ino from the project repository. This sketch
initializes the serial connection to the Maestro, checks for controller errors,
and then centers five of the six servos (shoulder, elbow, wrist pitch, wrist
roll, and gripper) at position 6000 (90 degrees). For safety, the waist servo
is left at its current position. Open the Serial Monitor at 115200 baud. You
should see the error code reported as 0 and a position readback for all six
channels.
     The position readback for channels 1 through 5 should report values
close to 6000. Channel 0 (waist) will report whatever position the servo was
in at power-up. If any channel reports 0, the Maestro is not receiving feed-
back from that servo. Check the connection.
     Once you have confirmed that all servos center correctly, experiment
by changing the target values in the sketch. Try commanding each servo
to its minimum (4000) and maximum (8000) positions to verify the full
range of motion. Pay attention to any mechanical binding or stalling at the
extremes, as not all arm configurations allow a full 180 degrees on every
joint.
     If the error code is nonzero, consult the Pololu Maestro documentation
for the specific error. If a servo does not move to center, verify its channel
wiring against Table 9-2 and confirm that the 5 V supply is connected and
delivering power under load. A servo that buzzes but does not move typi-
cally indicates insufficient current.

Create Movement Routines
In this step, you will write three sketches that generate the arm movements
used during data collection: one for a stationary baseline, one for normal
pick-and-place operation, and one that introduces simulated anomalies.
These routines run on the actual hardware because the training data must
reflect the real vibration, timing, and mechanical characteristics that the
sensor will encounter in deployment.
     You do not need the IMU connected during this step. The goal here
is to verify that the movement routines execute correctly and consistently
before collecting sensor data in “Collect the Training Data” on page XX.

The Stationary Sample
This is the simplest case; you power up the servos but hold the robot arm
in a stationary pose. You could do this with the arm switched off, but

                                                               Sensor Machine Learning   281
                  even with the servos not moving, there is still low-level vibration when
                  voltage is applied, which you want to capture. An energized servo holds
                  its position using a feedback loop that produces low-level vibration even
                  when stationary. This vibration is part of the sensor’s normal operating
                  signature, and the MLC needs to learn it. If you collected the stationary
                  baseline with the servos powered down, the model would flag normal
                  powered-idle as anomalous. The stationary pose sketch is provided in
                  repo file c09003​.­ino.

                  The Nominal Sample
                  Our robot arm is emulating a pick-and-place robot. The robot picks up an
                  object, moves its arm to the right, places the object down, lifts the arm back
                  up, returns to the left, and then repeats the entire sequence. As shown in
                  Table 9-5, each pick-and-place cycle takes around 19 seconds. The delay
                  shown is the time between each action; this allows the arm time to move
                  into position before executing the next action.

                  Table 9-5: Pick-and-Place Cycle Timing
                   Function            Description               Added delay(s)
                   up()                Shoulder and elbow        2.0
                   forward()           Shoulder and final pose   3.0
                   close_gripper()     Gripper close             0.0
                   up()                Shoulder and elbow        2.0
                   roll_right()        Wrist roll                0.0
                   swing_right()       Waist sequence            2.0
                   roll_straight()     Wrist roll                0.0
                   forward()           Shoulder and final pose   3.0
                   up()                Shoulder and elbow        2.0
                   swing_straight()    Waist to center           1.0
                   down()              Shoulder and elbow        2.0


                       Each function in the sequence maps to a combination of servo move-
                  ments. The up() function raises the shoulder and elbow to a clearance
                  height. The forward() function lowers the shoulder to position the gripper
                  over the target. The swing_right() function rotates the waist to move the
                  arm to the drop-off position.
                       The sketch is like that used for the stationary pose but loops the pick-
                  and-place action REPS times. The sketch uses a Timer2 interrupt to blink the
                  onboard LED at a rate that matches the current cycle number: one blink
                  per second during the first cycle, two during the second, and so on. After
                  the final cycle, the LED switches to a rapid blink to signal that the routine
                  is complete. This gives you a visual reference during data collection without
                  needing to watch the Serial Monitor.


282   Chapter 9
         Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

     In setup(), all servos are configured with a speed limit of 5 and an accel-
eration limit of 127. These settings produce smooth, controlled movements
rather than the abrupt snaps that would occur at default settings. The
motion profile directly affects the IMU data, so these values must remain
consistent between training and deployment.
     The swing_right() function reduces the waist acceleration to 64 for
a smoother rotation. The waist carries the most inertia when the arm is
extended, so a lower acceleration limit prevents overshoot and mechani-
cal stress. The start() function moves the arm to its initial pose before the
first cycle and returns it to the same pose after the last. The goHome() call
at the end sends all servos to the home positions stored in the Maestro’s
configuration.
     You may notice that the gripper closes during each cycle but never
explicitly reopens. For anomaly detection purposes, the IMU signature is
dominated by the larger arm movements, so the gripper state has minimal
effect on the training data. If you want to add an open_gripper() call at the
place position for realism, it will not affect the model. The nominal pick-
and-place sketch can be found in the c09004​.­ino file in the repo.
     During data collection (see “Collect the Training Data” on page XX),
you will record four 20-second samples from the IMU while this routine
runs, capturing different phases of the pick-and-place cycle. This ensures
the training data includes the full range of nominal motion patterns.

The Anomaly Sample
To simulate anomalies for our pick-and-place robot, you randomly stop the
servos in the middle of a pick-and-place cycle. This emulates a control fault
where the arm freezes mid-motion, analogous to a communication failure
or a firmware crash. Physical collisions produce different signatures (cur-
rent spikes, mechanical deflection) that would require additional training
classes. In a real anomaly detection situation, you would likely monitor the
servo current to detect surges and shut down the robot to prevent damage.
Each arm action has a 20 percent chance of simulating an anomaly. When
an anomaly event occurs, the robot halts, and the sketch must be reset to
continue. An extract from the anomaly sketch appears in Listing 9-1, which
shows the error code generation process. The complete sketch is in the
c09005​.­ino file in the repo.

bool check_for_anomaly(const char* step) {
  if (random(0, 10) < 2) { // 20% chance to simulate an anomaly
    Serial.print("⚠️ Anomaly detected at: ");
    Serial.println(step);
    while (true); // Simulate freeze (halt system)
  }
  return false;
}

...




                                                             Sensor Machine Learning   283
                   void up() {
                     check_for_anomaly("up");
                     servoController.setTarget(SHOULDER, 4000);
                     delay(1000);
                     servoController.setTarget(ELBOW, 6000);
                     delay(1000);
                     servoController.setTarget(WRIST_PITCH, 6000);
                   }
                   ...

                   Listing 9-1: The anomaly-generating code used to interrupt the pick-and-place movement


                   Collect the Training Data
                   Your complete hardware setup should look like Figure 9-7. From left to
                   right in this image, you can see the robot arm with the IMU mounted, the
                   ST evaluation kit, the servo controller, the Arduino UNO, and the servo
                   power supply.




Figure 9-7: The robot arm, controller, and IMU arrangement

                       Using this setup, you can capture three training datasets: stationary,
                   nominal, and anomaly. In our build, the IMU is mounted on the elbow
                   joint because the sensor cable was not long enough to reach the gripper.
                   This position still captures significant motion from the shoulder and elbow


284    Chapter 9
                           Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

                 joints, which dominate the pick-and-place cycle. Depending on the types of
                 anomalies you are trying to detect, somewhere closer to the gripper may be
                 better.
                     The sensor evaluation kit consists of two boards: the MKI245KA, which
                 carries the ISM330BX IMU on a DIL24 adapter, and the MKI109V3 moth-
                 erboard (Figure 9-8), which handles USB communication with the PC. Plug
                 the adapter into the motherboard and connect via USB.




Figure 9-8: The ST MEMS sensor evaluation boards (MKI245KA, MKI109V3, and MKIGI06A)

                     The firmware handles the communication between the board and the
                 PC through the USB bus. Figure 9-9 shows a block diagram of the motion
                 data acquisition and anomaly detection circuit. This is independent of the
                 robot arm control.

                                                                           Control
                                                                         BT1 - GPIO
                                                                         BT2 - GPIO
                                                                         BT3 - RESET



                                SPI / I2C                              STM32F401VE          USB       MEMS
                                                  DIL 24
               MEMS sensor                                                                            studio
                                               adapter board           microprocessor
                               Level shifter
                                                                                                          PC

                                                             Programable            Indicators
                                                         voltage and current     Power / USB LED
                                                                                   2 × INT LEDs
                                                                                  3 × GPIO LEDs

              Figure 9-9: A block diagram of data acquisition and anomaly detection

                     Open MEMS Studio (Figure 9-10) and connect to the MKI109V3 moth-
                 erboard via serial communication. Select the ISM330BX from the device

                                                                                Sensor Machine Learning    285
                  list. If the sensor does not appear, check the USB connection and ensure
                  the adapter board is seated correctly.




                  Figure 9-10: MEMS-Studio real-time sensor evaluation

                      You will use MEMS-Studio to log three datasets: stationary, nominal,
                  and anomaly. Each dataset is saved as a CSV file containing timestamped
                  accelerometer and gyroscope readings. The process is the same for all
                  three: Run the appropriate sketch on the Arduino, start a timed recording
                  in MEMS-Studio, and save the logfile.

                  Stationary Dataset Acquisition
                  Download and run the sketch described earlier (c09003​.i­ no) for the station-
                  ary state on the UNO. Wait for the robot arm to assume the pose, connect
                  the sensor motherboard to your PC, and fire up MEMS-Studio. You then
                  must connect with the motherboard using serial communication and select
                  the ISM330BX sensor. Click Sensor Evaluation in the left-hand navigation
                  pane and Easy Configuration under Quick Setup.
                      MEMS-Studio requires you to configure logging before you start data
                  acquisition (Figure 9-11).




286   Chapter 9
             Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such




Figure 9-11: The MEMS-Studio data logging screen

     The workflow is:

  1. Click Save to File and choose your output filename.
  2. Select the data items (timestamp, accelerometer, or gyroscope).
  3. Click the Play button in the top left to begin acquisition.
  4. Click the Record button to start logging. If you click Play before config-
     uring the logfile, you will need to stop and restart.

     Not much is happening with the stationary measurements, so try a
20-second sample period. The output will look something like Table 9-6.
The gyroscope readings may appear high for a stationary sensor. This is typ-
ical of uncalibrated MEMS gyroscopes and reflects the sensor’s bias offset
rather than actual rotation. The MLC training process accounts for this; the
model learns from the pattern of values, not from their absolute magnitude.

Table 9-6: Extract from Data_Log_Stationary.csv
                                                    Gyro X         Gyro Y           Gyro Z
 Time (µs)       Acc X (mg)   Acc Y (mg) Acc Z (mg) (mdps)         (mdps)           (mdps)
 336683489       –990.396     –30.988     44.530      109.375      1351.875         494.375
 336683638       –989.481     –30.195     45.811      43.750       1295.000         511.875
 336687765       –989.359     –31.293     45.994      153.125      1316.875         529.375




                                                                 Sensor Machine Learning   287
                  Nominal Dataset Acquisition
                  Next, load the pick-and-place sketch (c09004​.­ino) onto the UNO and run
                  it. Connect the IMU to your PC and start MEMS-Studio. If you look at the
                  real-time Line Charts tool in MEMS-Studio (Figure 9-12) as the arm moves,
                  you can see the IMU is initially stationary, then there is a noisy start-up
                  phase, and after about 10 seconds the IMU settles into a consistent pattern
                  once the arm is in the pick-and-place cycle. The screenshot shows almost
                  three pick-and-place cycles.




                  Figure 9-12: Real-time monitoring of the pick-and-place IMU pattern

                      Run the sketch and let the arm complete at least one full cycle to move
                  past the start-up transient. Then, start a 20-second recording in MEMS-
                  Studio. Restart the sketch and repeat, beginning the recording at a dif-
                  ferent point in the cycle each time. Collect four recordings in total. This
                  ensures the training data captures all phases of the pick-and-place motion,
                  not just one segment.

                  Anomaly Dataset Acquisition
                  Finally, load the anomaly sketch (c09005​.­ino) onto the UNO and run it. As
                  before, use MEMS-Studio to capture the anomaly data logs. When the arm
                  freezes, stop the recording. You will have to reset the UNO after an anom-
                  aly occurs to restart the sketch. Use the RESET button on the Arduino.
                  With each move having a 20 percent chance of triggering an anomaly, you
                  should get one anomaly every cycle. Collect at least six anomaly samples,
                  since the halt occurs at different points in the cycle each time due to the




288   Chapter 9
          Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

random trigger. Discard any recording where the anomaly occurred during
the start-up phase rather than during steady-state motion. In a real-time
plot, an anomaly will look like Figure 9-13.
     If you prefer, you can also collect a single continuous recording for all
states and label the segments in MEMS-Studio.




Figure 9-13: IMU anomaly detection in real time




                  W HAT IS A MACHINE LE ARNING CORE?

    The ISM330BX IMU includes a dedicated MLC designed to offload specific
    classification tasks from the main application processor to the sensor itself.
    The MLC operates by identifying whether a stream of sensor data, typically
    from the onboard accelerometer and gyroscope, matches one of several user-
    defined motion classes. In addition to inertial data, the core can also process
    signals from external sources such as the analog hub or QVAR sensors, mak-
    ing it suitable for a range of pattern recognition tasks beyond basic motion
    detection.
          To prepare the input data for classification, the MLC employs a configu-
    rable computation block. This block allows you to apply signal filtering and to
    extract features over a fixed time window, both of which are critical for robust
    ML inference. These processed values, along with raw filtered data, are acces-
    sible via the sensor’s FIFO buffer, making it easy to retrieve the classification
    result.
                                                                            (continued)




                                                                 Sensor Machine Learning   289
                           Sensor data        Computation block        Machine
                                                                     learning core
                          Accelerometer                                                Output register
                                                   Filters            Start node
                                                                                       B15         B3 B2 B1 B0
                           Gyroscope
                                                  Features           Decision trees     0    ...   0     0   1   0

                          Analog hub /
                             QVAR
                                                                                       Interrupt




                            The decision-making mechanism within the MLC is based on a logic tree
                      composed of a sequence of nodes, each defined by if-then-else conditions. At
                      each node, feature values are compared to user-defined thresholds to deter-
                      mine the next step in the decision process. This structure allows for the creation
                      of efficient, low-latency decision trees tailored to specific classification tasks, all
                      running directly on the sensor with minimal computational overhead.




                  Configure the Machine Learning Core
                  The ISM330BX can run up to four decision trees simultaneously, each pro-
                  ducing 16 classification results. The results are stored in a dedicated output
                  register that can be read at any time. You don’t need the sensor physically
                  connected for this step; MEMS-Studio can generate and validate decision
                  trees offline using the CSV data you collected in “Collect the Training
                  Data” on page XX.
                       To make things easier, you logged training samples for the three states:
                  stationary, nominal, and anomaly. But you could have one sample with all
                  three states and use MEMS-Studio to label the data (Figure 9-14). If you use
                  the single-data-log approach, once you have labeled the classes, click Save
                  Labeled Data and a file will be generated for each training class.




290   Chapter 9
          Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such




Figure 9-14: Using MEMS-Studio to label data log samples

    The Data Analysis tab is a good place to check your training data logs
before importing them into the MLC tool (Figure 9-15). Plot each dataset
and verify that the stationary samples show low variance, the nominal sam-
ples show a repeating cyclic pattern matching the pick-and-place cycle, and
the anomaly samples show a clear transition from motion to stillness. If any
sample contains recording artifacts (for example, spikes at the start or end
from clicking the Record button), trim or discard it.




Figure 9-15: The MLC tool in MEMS-Studio




                                                              Sensor Machine Learning   291
                       In the MLC tool, click Import to import your training data. Load each
                  CSV file and assign it the corresponding class label: stationary, nominal, or
                  anomaly.
                       After loading the data patterns you generated in “Collect the Training
                  Data” on page XX, check the Class labels, and then click the AFS Tool tab
                  (Figure 9-16). This is where you do automatic filter and feature selection
                  (AFS). To start, use the default values, but there are heaps of options if you
                  want to tweak the ML features. In general, selecting a higher number of
                  features increases the risk of overfitting and results in a larger decision tree.
                  This can lead to a model that performs well on training data but general-
                  izes poorly to new, unseen data.




                  Figure 9-16: Automatic Filter and Feature Selection options

                       The window length defines how many samples the MLC tool accumu-
                  lates before computing features and making a classification. MEMS-Studio
                  calculates this automatically based on the lowest-frequency component in
                  the training data. A longer window captures more context but increases
                  classification latency. For the pick-and-place cycle with its multi-second
                  phases, the default calculation should produce a window of several seconds,
                  which is appropriate.
                       Automatic filter selection can be performed using two different meth-
                  ods. The first is basic search, which identifies the strongest peaks in the fre-
                  quency spectrum. This approach is computationally efficient but performs
                  poorly on signals that are relatively flat and lack distinct peaks. The second
                  method is exhaustive search, which takes a more comprehensive approach.
                  It evaluates all possible combinations of frequency bands (arranged loga-
                  rithmically) and selects the frequency that best separates the target class
                  from others by minimizing entropy. While this method is more accurate, it




292   Chapter 9
                           Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

                  requires significantly more processing power. Try the basic search as a first
                  pass.
                      Click Run to execute the filter and feature selection, then click Apply
                  to Settings to transfer the results to the MLC configuration. The generated
                  window length, filter coefficients, and selected features appear in the ARFF
                  Generation tab (Figure 9-17).




                  Figure 9-17: The MEMS-Studio ARFF Generation tab

                       Click Generate ARFF File to create a copy of your training data. Open
                  the generated ARFF file in a text editor and verify that it contains rows
                  for all three classes. The class distribution should be roughly balanced. If
                  one class dominates (it appears in more than 60 percent of the rows), con-
                  sider collecting additional samples for the underrepresented classes before
                  proceeding.
                       The Attribute Relation File Format (ARFF) is a standard text-based
                  file format commonly used to store datasets for ML applications. An ARFF
                  file has two main parts: a header that defines the structure of the data, and
                  a data section that lists the actual examples used for training or testing a
                  model. An extract from our ARFF file is in Listing 9-2.

@relation 'MLC'

@attribute F1_MINIMUM_ACC_Y numeric
@attribute F2_MAXIMUM_ACC_Y numeric
@attribute F3_ENERGY_ACC_Y numeric
@attribute F4_ABS_MINIMUM_ACC_V numeric
@attribute F5_PEAK_TO_PEAK_GYR_Y numeric
@attribute F6_MINIMUM_ACC_Z numeric




                                                                               Sensor Machine Learning   293
@attribute F7_ABS_MEAN_GYR_V numeric
@attribute F8_ABS_MAXIMUM_ACC_V numeric
@attribute F9_PEAK_TO_PEAK_ACC_Y numeric
@attribute F10_MINIMUM_ACC_X numeric
@attribute F11_ABS_VARIANCE_ACC_V numeric
@attribute F12_ABS_ENERGY_GYR_V numeric
@attribute F13_ABS_MEAN_ACC_V numeric
@attribute F14_ABS_ENERGY_ACC_V numeric
@attribute F15_MAXIMUM_ACC_X numeric
@attribute class {stationary, nominal, anomaly}

@data
0.0285645, 0.0310669, 0.0684204, 0.974609, 0.00404358, 0.968262, 0.0242462, 0.978516,
0.00250244,
0.1073, 0.000976563, 0.0444946, 0.977539, 72.625, 0.110291, stationary
0.0275269, 0.0314331, 0.0685425, 0.975098, 0.0038147, 0.96875, 0.0242004, 0.978516, 0.00390625,
0.106689, 0.000976563, 0.0445251, 0.978516, 72.625, 0.110291, stationary
0.0286865, 0.0314331, 0.0691528, 0.975098, 0.00404358, 0.96875, 0.0241699, 0.978516,
0.00274658,
0.107666, 0.00195313, 0.044342, 0.978516, 72.5625, 0.110413, stationary
--snip--

Listing 9-2: An extract from an ARFF MLC file

                        In the context of the MLC, each row of the ARFF file represents a
                    single time window of sensor data that has been processed into a set of
                    features. These windows are the basic units the MLC uses to recognize pat-
                    terns or classify behaviors. By storing each window as a separate instance in
                    the ARFF file, the format provides a clear and organized way to train and
                    evaluate ML models on sensor-based data.
                        The AFS tool selected 15 features for this dataset. This is toward the
                    upper end for MLC deployment. If the decision tree generated in the next
                    section is excessively large or generalizes poorly, return to the AFS tab and
                    reduce the maximum number of features to 8 or 10.

                    Generate the Decision Tree
                    The next tab (Figure 9-18) is for decision tree generation, and this is where
                    everything comes together.




294    Chapter 9
          Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such




Figure 9-18: The decision tree generation and confusion matrix

      The Decision Tree Generation tab provides tools for configuring, train-
ing, and evaluating a decision tree classifier based on the selected data
classes. You can specify the number of decision trees to train, as well as
fine-tune the model using parameters. Leave the number of decision trees
at one. For this project, a single tree is sufficient to classify three motion
states.
      Starting with version 2.0.0 of MEMS-Studio, a new decision tree algo-
rithm is available. Use this algorithm rather than the legacy option. The
cross-validation it performs automatically helps prevent overfitting, which
is important given the relatively small number of training instances in this
project.
      This updated algorithm supports both depth-first and best-first tree
construction methods. It includes Breiman’s cost-complexity pruning and
uses cross-validation to determine the optimal tree size. You can adjust
parameters such as the maximum tree depth (Max depth), the minimum
number of samples required in a leaf node (Min leaf samples), and the pro-
portion of data used for training (Percentage of data to use for training).
      The default parameters are permissive: maximum depth of 2047
(­effectively unlimited), minimum leaf samples of 1, and 100 percent of the
data used for training. These defaults give the algorithm maximum free-
dom to fit the data. In many ML contexts, this would be a recipe for over­
fitting, but the v2.0.0 algorithm applies Breiman’s cost-complexity pruning
with internal cross-validation to keep the tree compact. For this project,
the defaults produced a tree with just four leaves, which confirms that the
three motion classes are well separated by the selected features. If your tree
is significantly larger (more than 10 to 15 leaves), that may indicate noisy
training data or poor class separation rather than a need to tighten the


                                                                 Sensor Machine Learning   295
                  parameters. In that case, return to “Collect the Training Data” on page XX
                  and review your training samples before reducing max depth.
                      The earlier decision tree training algorithm can still be used by
                  enabling the Use Legacy Decision Tree Train algo option. When this legacy
                  method is selected, parameters such as the Maximum number of nodes and
                  Confidence factor can be adjusted to control the pruning process.
                      After model configuration is complete, create the decision tree by click-
                  ing the Generate Decision Tree button. After your tree has been generated
                  or imported, MEMS-Studio displays performance metrics including accu-
                  racy, total number of instances, and the confusion matrix. You can examine
                  the resulting decision tree using Inspect Tree Info (Listing 9-3) for a tex-
                  tual breakdown or Show Decision Tree for a graphical view (Figure 9-19).
                  Your tree will have different values based on the training datasets you pro-
                  vided. What matters is not an exact match but comparable accuracy and a
                  confusion matrix without large off-diagonal values.

                  F6_MINIMUM_ACC_Z <= 0.934082
                  |   F15_MAXIMUM_ACC_X <= -0.882080
                  |   |   F3_ENERGY_ACC_Y <= 0.094879 : nominal (5)
                  |   |   F3_ENERGY_ACC_Y > 0.094879 : anomaly (127)
                  |   F15_MAXIMUM_ACC_X > -0.882080 : nominal (578)
                  F6_MINIMUM_ACC_Z > 0.934082 : stationary (126)

                  Number of Leaves: 4
                  Size of the tree: 7

                  Classes:
                  => stationary, nominal, anomaly

                  =============== Complete training data statistics ===============

                  Confusion Matrix:
                             stationary nominal anomaly            <- classified as
                  stationary 110         0       0
                  nominal    0           344     27
                  anomaly    0           0       110

                  Total Number of Instances: 591
                  Correctly Classified Instances: 564
                  Incorrectly Classified Instances: 27

                  Accuracy:          95.43 %
                  Cohen's kappa:     91.80 %

                  Report:    precision recall support
                  stationary 1.00       1.00   110
                  nominal    1.00       0.93   371
                  anomaly    0.80       1.00   110
                  avg/total 0.96        0.95   591

                  Listing 9-3: The MLC decision tree information



296   Chapter 9
                               Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

                           The confusion matrix reveals that the model’s only weakness is the
                      boundary between nominal and anomaly classes: 27 nominal instances
                      were misclassified as anomalies. This makes sense intuitively. An anomaly
                      is defined as the arm stopping mid-cycle, and some nominal windows cap-
                      tured near the end of a movement phase (when the arm is briefly stationary
                      between actions) may resemble an anomaly halt. In a production system,
                      this 7 percent false-positive rate on the nominal class could be addressed by
                      collecting more training data that includes these transitional moments, or
                      by adjusting the anomaly detection threshold.
                           Cohen’s kappa of 0.918 indicates strong agreement beyond what would
                      be expected by chance alone. Values above 0.80 are generally considered
                      excellent for classification tasks.
                           For anomaly detection, recall on the anomaly class is the critical met-
                      ric: A missed fault could result in equipment damage. The model achieves
                      perfect recall (1.00) on the anomaly class, meaning it never fails to flag a
                      genuine anomaly. The precision of 0.80 means roughly one in five anomaly
                      alerts will be a false alarm during normal operation.
                           The generated tree uses only three of the 15 available features (F6_
                      MINIMUM_ACC_Z, F15_MAXIMUM_ACC_X, and F3_ENERGY_ACC_Y) and has just four leaf
                      nodes. This compactness is ideal for MLC deployment: Fewer nodes means
                      faster classification and less memory consumption on the sensor. We redrew
                      the decision tree in Figure 9-19 because the automatically generated tree is
                      hard to read.


     Start


   F6_MINIMUM_ACC_Z <=     F15_MINIMUM_ACC_X <=     F15_MINIMUM_ACC_X <=
                                                                                                      Nominal
         0.934082      Yes       –0.882080      Yes       –0.882080      Yes


             No                              No                             No


         Stationary                        Nominal                       Anomaly


Figure 9-19: The generated decision tree for the machine learning core

                           If the accuracy is below 90 percent or the confusion matrix shows sig-
                      nificant misclassification between all three classes, return to “Configure the
                      Machine Learning Core” on page XX and try exhaustive search in the AFS
                      tool, or reduce the number of features to focus the tree on the most dis-
                      criminative signals. If the boundary between nominal and anomaly remains
                      weak, collect additional training samples that capture the transitional
                      moments.




                                                                                   Sensor Machine Learning   297
                  Deploy the Model
                  At this point, the decision tree exists only on your PC. To run it on the
                  ISM330BX, you need to generate a configuration file that encodes the tree
                  structure, feature definitions, and classification parameters in a format the
                  MLC hardware can execute.
                       The Config Generation tab (Figure 9-20) is used to configure the meta-
                  classifiers and generate a .json file that defines the ML core settings. This
                  file contains all the necessary information for deploying the trained deci-
                  sion tree to your sensor.




                  Figure 9-20: Creating a configuration file for deployment

                       A metaclassifier is a hysteresis filter that stabilizes the output of a
                  decision tree. It works by using internal counters to monitor how often
                  a particular class or group of similar classes is detected. Classes can be
                  grouped into subgroups, and each subgroup has its own counter. This
                  counter increases when the decision tree outputs a class from the sub-
                  group and decreases when it does not. Once the counter reaches a preset
                  value, called the end counter (set by the user and ranging from 0 to 14),
                  the ML core updates its output. This approach helps reduce false posi-
                  tives and prevents the system from switching too quickly between classes
                  when the data is noisy or unclear. The ISM330BX supports up to four sub-
                  groups, so you might need to group closely related classes when using the
                  metaclassifier.




298   Chapter 9
         Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

     For this project, the three motion classes are sufficiently distinct that
the decision tree output is stable without metaclassifier filtering. You can
leave the end counter at 0, which disables the hysteresis and passes the raw
classification through to the output register. If you later add classes with
similar motion profiles or find that the output flickers between classes dur-
ing transitions, increasing the end counter to 2 or 3 will stabilize the result
at the cost of a slight delay in detecting class changes.
     In the Config Generation tab, each class defined during training is
assigned a unique output value (stationary = 0, nominal = 4, and anom-
aly = 8). These class output values are numerical identifiers that the ML core
uses to represent classification results. When the sensor detects a pattern
corresponding to one of the trained classes, it writes the associated output
value to a designated register. These values can then be read by the micro-
controller to determine which class the sensor has recognized.
     In addition to JSON format, the configuration can also be exported as
a .h header file using the Export As button. This is useful for embedding
the configuration directly into firmware.
     If a supported sensor is connected to the development board, the con-
figuration can be uploaded directly to the sensor’s memory using the Load
Config into Sensor button. This step programs the MLC with the selected
settings, enabling it to begin classification tasks without further input from
the host processor. Go ahead and load your configuration into the IMU.

Test It Out
Before disconnecting the sensor from the evaluation motherboard, verify
the model using the Decision Tree Output Viewer tab in MEMS-Studio.
Run each of the three movement sketches on the Arduino and confirm
that the viewer displays the correct classification. This is the fastest way to
validate the model. Once verified, you can proceed to connect the sensor to
the Arduino and read the classification via I²C.
    The Decision Tree Output Viewer tab (Figure 9-21) allows you to test
the generated MLC configuration by displaying the output of each decision
tree in real time on a chart. This helps you verify that the classifier is func-
tioning correctly and responding as expected to different input patterns.




                                                             Sensor Machine Learning   299
                  Figure 9-21: The decision tree output viewer

                       Once you have confirmed that the model classifies correctly in the
                  Decision Tree Output Viewer, the next step is to read the classification
                  result from the Arduino. This moves you from a PC-based verification to
                  the standalone configuration your final system will use.
                       For hardware testing, disconnect the MKI245KA sensor board from
                  the MKI109V3 motherboard and connect it to the Arduino UNO via I²C.
                  Connect SDA to Arduino pin A4, connect SCL to Arduino pin A5, and
                  provide 3.3 V power from the Arduino’s 3V3 pin. The MLC configuration
                  persists in the sensor’s memory after programming, so the evaluation moth-
                  erboard is no longer needed.
                       Repo file c09006​.­ino is a simple Arduino sketch that you can use to ini-
                  tialize I²C communication with an ISM330BX and read the MLC state from
                  the relevant register. This assumes the sensor is connected using I²C and
                  that you have already loaded an MLC configuration into the IMU. This is
                  a very bare-bones sketch and doesn’t do any IMU initialization; as a sanity
                  check, you could read the WHO_AM_I register (0x0F) at startup and verify it
                  returns the expected device ID for the ISM330BX.
                       The MLC output is stored in dedicated registers (Table 9-7), which con-
                  tain the recognized class ID from the decision tree. The MLC_STATUS register
                  (0x15) contains the interrupt status bits for changes in the decision tree
                  result.




300   Chapter 9
          Embedded AI (Sample Chapter) © 2026 by David Such

Table 9-7: The MLC Output Registers for
ISM330BX Decision Trees
 Decision tree     Register name Address
 Decision tree 1   MLC1_SRC      0x70
 Decision tree 2   MLC2_SRC      0x71
 Decision tree 3   MLC3_SRC      0x72
 Decision tree 4   MLC4_SRC      0x73


     Run the robot’s motion sequence and observe when the model identi-
fies a transition from normal movement to anomaly.

What’s Next
Once your robot arm can detect motion anomalies using the ISM330BX’s
internal ML core, you can build on this foundation in several directions.
     You can start by improving fault coverage. The model you created dis-
tinguishes between normal and abnormal motion, but you can expand it to
identify specific fault types such as servo failure, loose joints, or mechanical
obstructions. This requires collecting additional labeled datasets that rep-
resent each failure mode. MEMS-Studio makes this process straightforward
by enabling you to label multiple classes and retrain the decision tree with-
out rewriting any code.
     Another useful extension is to monitor servo current. Many robotic
faults first appear as a rise in current before motion changes. Adding cur-
rent sensing with small inline shunt resistors or dedicated current sensors
such as the INA219 allows you to correlate electrical behavior with motion
data. Combining these signals in a multi-sensor ML model increases reli-
ability and can help predict faults before they occur.
     You can also integrate wireless communication. Using Bluetooth Low
Energy or Wi-Fi, the IMU’s classification output can be transmitted to a
dashboard or maintenance system. This turns your robot arm into a con-
nected device capable of self-reporting its health status. For industrial
setups, alerts could be sent to a supervisory controller or maintenance log
automatically.
     If you want to go further with embedded intelligence, consider using
the ISM330BX’s Intelligent Sensor Processing Unit (ISPU). The ISPU lets
you run custom C code or neural network models directly on the sensor,
enabling more complex pattern recognition or adaptive learning without
increasing system load.
     On the mechanical side, you could scale the concept to multi-axis
robots or conveyor systems. The same process applies: Mount sensors on key




                                                              Sensor Machine Learning   301
                   moving parts, collect labeled data, and train small models to detect irregu-
                   larities. Over time, this creates a network of smart sensors, each of which
                   understands its normal motion pattern.
                        Finally, you might integrate this project into a larger predictive main-
                   tenance system. By logging classified events and their frequency, you can
                   build a long-term health profile for the robot. This data helps schedule
                   maintenance before breakdowns occur, reducing downtime and costs.
                        This project demonstrated how sensor ML can bring intelligence
                   directly to the data source. By embedding the model inside the IMU, your
                   system detects abnormal motion in real time without relying on a host
                   processor. This approach reduces latency, power use, and complexity while
                   pushing AI to the true edge of the embedded system.


      Conclusion
                   In this chapter, you explored how sensors can do more than just measure:
                   They can interpret, classify, and act. The techniques—collecting labeled
                   sensor data, extracting features, and training a compact model for edge
                   deployment—apply well beyond motion sensing. The next chapter intro-
                   duces a related but distinct approach to a different sensory domain: audio.
                        Unwanted noise degrades every audio signal, whether it is a voice on a
                   phone call, a musical note, or a sensor picking up an environmental event.
                   Real-time noise suppression tackles this problem at the source by cleaning
                   up signals before they reach your ears or your model.
                        In the next chapter, you will build a system that listens, thinks, and
                   improves the input stream. A MEMS microphone captures live audio, which
                   is then processed through a recurrent neural network trained to separate
                   speech from noise. The cleaned audio stream is sent to a display where a
                   spectrogram shows, in real time, how the model suppresses noise and pre-
                   serves the signal. This project combines hardware, digital signal processing,
                   and machine learning to bring intelligence to hearing.




302    Chapter 9
