                                       1
                      W H AT IS BI TCOIN?




In the simplest terms, Bitcoin is just another currency.
The term Bitcoin refers to the entire currency system,
                                                     1
whereas bitcoins are the basic units of the currency.
As with dollars, euros, yen, and gold coins, you can
save bitcoins, spend them on goods and services, and exchange them for
other currencies. However, Bitcoin is the world’s first currency that is both
digital and decentralized.
     A digital currency is one that can be easily stored and used on a com-
puter. By this definition, even dollars can be considered a digital currency,
since they can be easily sent to others or used to shop online, but their sup-
ply is controlled by a centralized bank organization. In contrast, gold coins
are decentralized, meaning that no central authority controls the supply of
gold in the world. In fact, anyone can dig for gold, create new coins, and
distribute them. However, unlike digital currencies, it’s not easy to use gold
coins to pay for goods (at least not with exact change!), and it’s impossible
to transfer gold coins over the Internet. Because Bitcoin combines these two


1. Similar to how renminbi is name of the Chinese currency, but the yuan is the basic unit.
                properties, it is somewhat like digital gold.
                Never before has there been a currency
                with both these two properties, and its
                impact on our increasingly digital, global-
                ized world may turn out to be significant.
                     Sometimes called a stateless currency,
                Bitcoin is not associated with any nation.
                However, you should not consider Bitcoin
                to be in the same category as private curren-
                cies, hundreds of which have existed in var-
                ious forms in the past.2 Private currencies,
                whether issued by a person, a company,
                or a nonstate organization, are centrally
                controlled and run the risk of collapse due
                to bankruptcy or other economic failure.
                Bitcoin is not a company, nor does a single
                person or organization issue or control bit-
                coins; therefore, it has no central point of failure. For this reason, nobody
                can inflate the currency supply and create hyperinflation crises, such as
                those that occurred in post–World War I Germany and more recently in
                Zimbabwe.3
                     Many people are asking about the motive behind the creation of
                Bitcoin, so let’s explore the currency’s purpose.


    Why Bitcoin Now?
                Until recently, people could not send digital cash back and forth to each
                other in a reliable way without a central mediator. A trusted central media-
                tor such as PayPal can track payments and money transfers in a privately
                held account ledger, but it wasn’t clear how a group of strangers who do
                not trust each other could accomplish the same transactions dependably.4
                Sometimes referred to as the Byzantine Generals’ Problem, this fundamen-
                tal conundrum also emerges in computer science, specifically in how to
                achieve consensus on a distributed network.




                2. For example, in the mid-1800s, banks, companies, churches, and individuals issued hun-
                dreds of private currencies in the United States. Eventually, most of these private currencies
                lost all their value.
                3. Between 1921 and 1924, the value of the German mark fell by a factor of more than 10 tril-
                lion due to overprinting by the government. In 2008, the government of Zimbabwe printed
                so much of its currency that in a single year, a loaf of bread increased from $1 to $100 billion.
                In both cases, any savings that people had in the form of national currency were completely
                destroyed.
                4. To say that something is decentralized is more or less equivalent to saying that it is run by a
                group of strangers who don’t necessarily trust each other.

2   Chapter 1
             In 2008, the problem was elegantly solved by Bitcoin’s inventor, known
        pseudonymously as Satoshi Nakamoto. Satoshi’s significant breakthrough
        made it possible for a digital currency to exist without relying on a cen-
        tral authority. Satoshi described the solution to the Byzantine Generals’
        Problem and the invention of Bitcoin in a white paper titled “Bitcoin: A
        Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” But the creation of the software that
        demonstrated the concept in practice was released a year later.
             Although the first version of the software was written by Satoshi, it
        quickly became a community project as the software was improved and
        maintained by hundreds of volunteers. Currently, the software is open
        source, and anyone can read and contribute to it. In January of 2009,
        the first bitcoins were distributed using the early Bitcoin software, and
        since then transactions have been running smoothly. Slowly but surely, an
        increasing number of people have started using Bitcoin, and what began
        as an experiment is now a multibillion dollar economy that processes hun-
        dreds of thousands of transactions per day (and is growing quickly).


The Benefits of Using Bitcoin
        Bitcoin is an inherently international currency; anyone can send bitcoins
        to anyone else in the world, in any amount, almost instantly. In addition,
        it is becoming increasingly possible to travel the world and spend bitcoins
        without having to change them into the local currency. Because no middle-
        man is involved, transaction fees are negligible. Unlike with credit cards,
        which require giving online merchants your personal information, you can
        use bitcoins to shop online while maintaining your privacy. There is no
        risk of losing your savings due to runaway inflation because bitcoins were
        designed to have a fixed supply. Bitcoins are also fundamentally impossible
        to counterfeit.
              As a merchant, you can start accepting bitcoins as payment immediately
        without filling out tedious paperwork (compared to setting up the credit
        card transaction process). You can also own bitcoins without anyone else
        knowing, and no third party or government can seize your money. (The
        privacy this feature entails may protect the security and freedom of political
        dissidents living under repressive regimes, for example.)
              Thanks to all of its benefits, Bitcoin continues to increase in popularity;
        however, anyone familiar with Bitcoin will agree the technology behind it is
        difficult to explain and understand. At first blush, it’s hard to grasp how
        bitcoins are stored, how they are used, or even where they come from.




                                                                          What Is Bitcoin?   3
    The Complexity and Confusion of Bitcoin
                Rarely do we get to see the creation of a new currency, let alone one that is
                so different from previous currencies. This creates major challenges in com-
                prehension and comfort for most people.
                      Bitcoin can be compared to the advent of paper currency years ago
                when everyone was using gold and silver coins. Then, it must have seemed
                strange and confusing to attribute value to little pieces of paper instead of
                precious metals. Today, paper currency feels fairly safe, and trading paper
                for a purely digital asset like bitcoins seems odd. Furthermore, the economic
                and social consequences of switching to a decentralized digital currency are
                still unclear. Even Satoshi and the early volunteers who helped develop the
                concept could not have imagined precisely how Bitcoin would be used and
                valued by society, much as the creators of the Internet in the 1980s could not
                have predicted how transformative it would become.
                      Confusion also stems from the fact that Bitcoin is a truly complex tech-
                nology. It relies not only on Satoshi’s breakthrough to achieving consensus
                on a distributed network but also on modern cryptographic techniques,
                such as digital signatures, public/private key pairs, and secure hashing.
                (These cryptographic concepts are covered in detail in Chapter 7.) The


4   Chapter 1
        issuing of new currency occurs through a cryptographic lottery called
        mining that anyone can participate in. Mining simultaneously processes
        transactions made by Bitcoin users. To resist abuse from those who might
        want to destroy the network, Bitcoin’s design uses game theory to align the
        incentives of those who maintain the network and those who want to act in
        their own selfish interest. (Bitcoin mining and game theory is explained in
        detail in Chapter 8.)
            Put simply, you cannot learn and completely understand Bitcoin in a
        single afternoon. However, we hope this book will help you understand the
        basics of Bitcoin as quickly as possible.


What’s in This Book?
        To make sense of the Bitcoin technology and phenomenon, you must
        view it from multiple perspectives. This book is organized around those
        perspectives.

        •   First, we’ll look at Bitcoin from the perspective of a basic user. In
            Chapters 2–4 we describe how Bitcoin works and how you can acquire,
            spend, and safely store bitcoins—so you can actually start using Bitcoin.
        •   Next, in Chapters 5 and 6, we take a philosophical perspective on
            Bitcoin. Chapter 5 is an adventure story told from the perspective of
            Crowley the cryptographer. Crowley gets stranded on an island and
            needs to figure out how to efficiently exchange goods with inhabitants
            of other distant islands. Crowley knows about Bitcoin from a chance
            encounter with Satoshi but has significant doubts about the currency.
            In the story, he works through his doubts (which may be similar to
            yours) by giving Bitcoin a chance.
                 Chapter 6 continues in this philosophical vein by looking at the
            potentially broader impact of Bitcoin and the potentially uneasy rela-
            tionship of Bitcoin and its users with nation states whose currencies
            compete with Bitcoin.
        •   Then, we’ll look at Bitcoin from the perspective of an advanced user.
            Chapters 7–9 describe the cryptographic methods behind Bitcoin, the
            details of bitcoin mining, and the nuances of various third-party wallet
            software solutions.
        •   Finally, in Chapter 10, we’ll look at what the distant future might look
            like in a world where Bitcoin has gone mainstream.
        •   For programmers and developers who are new to Bitcoin, the appen-
            dices show you how to write your own programs to send and receive
            bitcoins.

             As you read this book, keep in mind just how new Bitcoin is as a tech-
        nology. For fields like particle physics, Egyptian history, or constitutional
        law, we can turn to authority figures that have devoted the better part of
        their lives to studying those subjects; by comparison nobody is really an


                                                                         What Is Bitcoin?   5
                expert on Bitcoin. Just as there were no electricians before the discovery of
                electricity or programming gurus before computers were invented, argu-
                ably no Bitcoin experts exist today. We are all Bitcoin beginners, and no
                one can predict with any clarity how Bitcoin will evolve, even a year or two
                into the future.
                    On the upside, this means that if Bitcoin becomes widely used in the
                future, the potential exists for you to become one of the early experts in
                Bitcoin, since you are studying this technology at such an early stage. We
                hope you will be inspired by the ideas behind Bitcoin and will make your
                own contributions to this wonderful technology in years to come.
                    Now, let’s learn some Bitcoin basics.




6   Chapter 1
                       2
              BITCOIN BA SICS




In our experience, the simplest way to get a person
excited about Bitcoin is to have him purchase some-
thing with it. That’s how we got hooked ourselves. In
this chapter, we’ll help you perform your first Bitcoin
transaction, without worrying about too much tech-
nical stuff. Along the way, though, we’ll discuss how
Bitcoin works. After reading this chapter, you’ll under-
stand the basics of Bitcoin—enough to chat about it at
any cocktail party.
    How Bitcoin Works in Simple Terms
                In the Bitcoin system, everyone cooperates to keep track of everyone else’s
                money, and as mentioned in Chapter 1, no central authority (e.g., bank or
                government) is involved. To best understand how the system works, let’s
                walk through an example using dollars first.
                     Imagine only $21 million exists in the world, and there also exists a
                detailed list of all the people who possess that money. Everyone, including
                you (even though you have only $5), has a copy of this list. When you give
                $2 to your friend, you must subtract $2 from your entry on the list and add $2
                to her entry. After informing her of the transaction, she updates her list as
                well. In fact, everyone in the world needs to update the list; otherwise, the list
                would be inaccurate. Therefore, not only do you need to notify your friend,
                but you also need to publicly announce that you are updating the list. If you
                tried to cheat the system and send your friend $1000, your cheating attempt
                would be easy to catch because everyone knows you have only $5 to give.
                     Now, imagine that all transactions are carried out on computers that
                communicate via the Internet, and replace dollars with bitcoins. This is how
                Bitcoin works. Pretty simple actually. So why does Bitcoin seem so complex?

8   Chapter 2
             The answer is threefold: First is the tricky question of how the units of
         any new currency system (whether bitcoins or seashells) should be valued.
         Should a haircut be worth 5000 bitcoins or 0.005 bitcoins? Second, many
         small details are involved in implementing and using Bitcoin, even though
         the overall concept is fairly straightforward. For example, how do you obtain a
         copy of the list, and how are bitcoins initially distributed? Third, an entire lexi-
         con of new and unfamiliar words (e.g., mining) is used in the Bitcoin world.
             We’ll leave the first point about the value of bitcoins for a later chapter.
         In this chapter, we’ll address the last two points by explaining the major
         concepts used in Bitcoin, namely the Bitcoin address, the private key, the
         Bitcoin wallet, and the blockchain. We’ll also briefly discuss Bitcoin min-
         ing and walk you through the process of receiving and sending your first
         bitcoins so you can see how the system works. But first, you need to under-
         stand the Bitcoin units in more detail.


Bitcoin Units
         As explained in Chapter 1, Bitcoin refers collectively to the entire currency
         system, whereas bitcoins are the units of the currency. Although the total
         currency supply is capped at 21 million bitcoins, each one can be subdivided
         into smaller denominations; for example, 0.1 bitcoins and 0.001 bitcoins.
         The smallest unit, a hundred millionth of a bitcoin (0.00000001 bitcoins),
         is called a satoshi in honor of Satoshi Nakamoto. As a result, goods can be
         priced in Bitcoin very precisely, and people can easily pay for those goods in
         exact change (e.g., a merchant can price a gallon of milk at 0.00152374 bit-
         coins, or 152,374 satoshis).
              Rather than writing the term bitcoins on price tags, merchants com-
         monly use the abbreviated currency code BTC or XBT; 5 bitcoins would
         be written as 5 BTC. Despite the fact that the BTC abbreviation has been
         widely used since the beginning of Bitcoin’s development, more recently
         some merchants and websites have started using XBT because it conforms
         better to certain international naming standards.1 As bitcoins have appreci-
         ated in value, it has become increasingly common to work with thousandths
         or even millionths of bitcoins, which are called millibitcoins (mBTC) and micro-
         bitcoins (µBTC), respectively. Many people have suggested simpler names for
         Bitcoin’s smaller denominations, and one that has gained traction is referring
         to microbitcoins (quite a mouthful) as simply as bits.
              1 bitcoin = 1 BTC or 1 XBT
              1 BTC = 1,000 mBTC
              1 mBTC = 1,000 µBTC
              1 µBTC = 100 satoshis = 1 bit


         1. The standard for currency codes (ISO 4217) uses the first character in the code to refer to
         the country issuing the currency. However, since Bitcoin is a nongovernmental currency, the
         standard suggests that its name should start with X, as is the case with gold or silver, whose
         codes are XAU and XAG, respectively.

                                                                                         Bitcoin Basics   9
                     Now that you know the terms for various Bitcoin units, you need to
                 increase your Bitcoin vocabulary, so let’s talk about what is meant by a
                 Bitcoin address.


     The Bitcoin Address
                 Bitcoin uses a public ledger that indicates the number of bitcoins and their
                 owners at any given time. But instead of associating names of people with
                 accounts, the ledger only lists Bitcoin addresses. Each address can be thought
                 of as a pseudonym for a person (or group of people, business, etc.), and the
                 use of pseudonyms is why people can use bitcoins without revealing per-
                 sonal information. The following is an example of a Bitcoin address:

                 13tQ1fbTMB6GxUJfMqCSDgivc8fvkHEh3J

                      Like a bank account number, a Bitcoin address consists of a string of let-
                 ters and numbers (usually beginning with the number 1). To send bitcoins
                 to others (e.g., an online merchant, a friend, or a family member), you only
                 need to know their Bitcoin address. In turn, when you share your address
                 with others, they can send you bitcoins. Because Bitcoin addresses are cum-
                 bersome to type, many people use quick response (QR) codes to represent their
                 address (see Figure 2-1).2 For convenience, you can put your Bitcoin address,
                 either typed or as a QR code (or both), on your business card, personal web-
                 site, or storefront (if you’re a merchant). Although you need an Internet
                 connection to send bitcoins, you don’t need to be connected to receive them.
                 For example, if you work for a charity and pass out thousands of business
                 cards containing your Bitcoin address and a statement like “Please consider
                 donating in bitcoins,” your organization can collect bitcoins while you sleep.


                                 = "hello world"



                         "16r61N8tBo3FTQGwZ
                         CRXLLygNqVL8NEsrR" =



                 Figure 2-1: QR codes can be used to represent arbi-
                 trary data. They are easy to scan with smartphones
                 and so are convenient for sharing the long strings of
                 characters used for Bitcoin addresses.



                 2. The QR code is just one of many ways to easily share a Bitcoin address. Another method
                 is to use a first bits scheme in which you share only the first few characters of your Bitcoin
                 address, which has been abbreviated by a Bitcoin address–shortening services (similar to a
                 URL-shortening service). Starting with version 0.9 and later, Bitcoin also supports human-
                 readable Bitcoin addresses that replace the traditional ones—much as a website address such
                 as toys.com replaces the less user-friendly IP address of 123.100.101.111.

10   Chapter 2
             As you know, in traditional banking, moving money from one account
        to another means that the bank would update its privately held ledger that
        listed every account at that bank. If a fire or other disaster destroyed that
        ledger, information about who owned the assets at the bank might be lost
        forever. Although Bitcoin also uses a ledger, identical copies of it are distrib-
        uted across millions of computers around the world. Consequently, no cen-
        tral point of failure exists, and transactions recorded on the Bitcoin ledger
        are permanent and impossible to erase. Moving bitcoins from one address
        to another is equivalent to sending an instruction to all of the computers on
        the Bitcoin network to update each ledger in the same way.
             Because all transactions on the Bitcoin ledger are public information,
        maintaining privacy (if that is desired) can be a challenge. Although no per-
        sonal information is on the ledger, if you share your Bitcoin address with your
        friends or post it in a public place that others can associate with your identity,
        your Bitcoin balance at that address will be known to everyone (including all
        incoming and outgoing transactions). To enhance your privacy, you can use
        many Bitcoin addresses but publicly share only some of them.3
             So how do you move bitcoins from one address to another (i.e., spend
        them)? Well, this action requires a private key.


The Private Key
        A private key, like a Bitcoin address, is a long string of numbers and letters
        (usually beginning with the number 5). As with Bitcoin addresses, QR
        codes are often used to represent private keys because of their length. Each
        private key is paired with a single Bitcoin address and is able to unlock the
        bitcoins at that address (i.e., move them elsewhere).4 The following is an
        example of a private key:

        5J2ae37Jwqzt7kSp9rE17Mi2LbkHXx4tzNSzbq7xDp2cQJCzhYo

            Whereas a Bitcoin address is similar to a bank account number, a
        private key is more like a PIN: You need it to authorize a withdrawal or
        an expenditure. When a transaction is broadcast to the Bitcoin network,
        instructing bitcoins to be moved from one address to another, computers
        on the network check whether the transaction is authorized before mak-
        ing any updates to the public ledger. Specifically, they check whether the
        transaction has been digitally signed using a private key. A digital signa-
        ture is extra data appended to a transaction that can only be created by


        3. In general, maintaining complete privacy while doing online transactions is very difficult,
        with or without Bitcoin. Although the use of Bitcoin helps protect privacy when compared to
        using a credit card, it is not a complete solution. Other tools and precautions might need to
        be used as well (for example, using the online privacy-protecting TOR browser).
        4. Although every private key is associated with a single Bitcoin address, the reverse is not
        always true. A Bitcoin address can require multiple private keys to unlock the bitcoins at that
        address (in this case, the Bitcoin address will begin with the number 3 instead of the usual 1).
        However, this advanced feature isn’t used for most common transactions.

                                                                                       Bitcoin Basics   11
                 someone possessing the corresponding private key. Similar to a PIN, a pri-
                 vate key should be kept secret. If someone obtains your private key, he will
                 be able to spend your bitcoins.
                      Note that although a private key can be used to produce a digital sig-
                 nature, a digital signature cannot be used to obtain a private key. Digital
                 signatures also cannot be reused to make new transactions; therefore, broad-
                 casting a signed transaction to the Bitcoin network is not a risk. This action is
                 fundamentally different from making an online payment with a credit card.
                 When you use a credit card, you provide your credit card number to someone
                 to authorize a transaction. That number can then be reused (maliciously) to
                 authorize more transactions that you never intended.
                      Unlike a PIN, which both you and the bank know, only you know the
                 private key. The risk you take in this circumstance is if you lose the private
                 key to an address in which you’ve stored bitcoins, those bitcoins will remain
                 locked in that address forever. Clearly, it is extremely important not to lose
                 your private key! Fortunately, you can easily make digital backups of your
                 private keys or write them on a piece of paper and keep them in a safe
                 place. Losing your Bitcoin address is not a problem, however, as it can be
                 recovered from the corresponding private key (Bitcoin wallet programs,
                 described later in this chapter, can do this for you automatically).
                      Although it’s possible to use Bitcoin with only a single address and
                 private key, in practice most people use many addresses, each with its
                 own private key, and store them in a digital wallet.


     The Bitcoin Wallet
                 A Bitcoin wallet is a collection of addresses and private keys owned by one per-
                 son. Having multiple Bitcoin addresses can help you organize your money.
                 You may want separate addresses for paying rent, for shopping online, and
                 for saving bitcoins to pay for a house in the future. So a person could have
                 two bitcoins in his wallet that are distributed among many different Bitcoin
                 addresses (see Figure 2-2).
                      Using multiple addresses, in the form of a wallet, also helps you main-
                 tain privacy. This is because the public ledger maintained by Bitcoin, which
                 anyone can look at, has no way of knowing that any two addresses are in
                 the same wallet and are owned by the same person (as long as that person
                 hasn’t done anything to show that the two addresses are linked, such as
                 making a single purchase using bitcoins from both accounts).
                      To manage several addresses and private keys, people use Bitcoin wal-
                 let programs.5 Whereas a Bitcoin wallet is an abstract concept, referring to a
                 group of Bitcoin addresses, a wallet program is a concrete tool that helps
                 users with common Bitcoin tasks, such as creating new Bitcoin addresses,
                 sending bitcoins to others, backing up private keys, and many others. But
                 be aware that the terminology surrounding Bitcoin wallets is not always



                 5. Also called Bitcoin wallet clients.

12   Chapter 2
used consistently. Often, Bitcoin wallet programs are called Bitcoin wallets
for short, confusing these two distinct concepts. When you save a Bitcoin
wallet (perhaps to make a backup copy), you create a wallet file, which con-
tains information for multiple Bitcoin addresses. Later, you can load your
wallet files into a Bitcoin wallet program.

                              Bitcoin Wallet Program
        Create wallet                 Load wallet

     My Personal Bitcoin Wallet       Total balance: 347,500 bits (.3475 BTC)

        Bitcoin address #1            College savings fund
           Private key #1               (300,000 bits)           Generate new address
        Bitcoin address #2              Money from Dave
           Private key #2                (12,500 bits)               Send bitcoins
        Bitcoin address #3             Monthly allowance
           Private key #3                (35,000 bits)           Create wallet backup
        Bitcoin address #4              Change address
           Private key #4                  (0 bits)



Figure 2-2: A Bitcoin wallet is an organized collection of addresses and their correspond-
ing private keys. Bitcoin wallet programs exist to help perform common tasks like sending
bitcoins and managing the bitcoins in your wallet.

    Many Bitcoin wallet programs are available to choose from; most
are free downloads and can be run on your laptop or phone, or even in
your web browser. We’ll explore the various Bitcoin wallet programs in
Chapter 3, but in this chapter we’ll use the Electrum wallet, which is open
source, cross platform, and very simple to use.


                      GE T TING SOME “S TA R TE R MONE Y”
                             TO LE A RN A BOU T BITCOIN
     You’ll need a small amount of Bitcoin (less than $1 USD) to work through this
     chapter. If you have a friend who’s a bitcoiner, consider asking her to give you
     a little change to use for practice. Otherwise, go to http://newbiecoins.com/,
     which is a site we (the authors) will maintain as a public service and which will
     list other sites that are giving away small amounts of free Bitcoin. There are usu-
     ally some reputable sites giving out coins for newbies, but the situation for such
     giveaways is fluid, with sites going up or down daily, so we can’t cover specific
     ones in this book.




                                                                             Bitcoin Basics   13
                 Creating Your First Bitcoin Wallet with Electrum
                 To follow along in this section, download and install Electrum (http://electrum
                 .org/). If you choose to use a different Bitcoin wallet program, most of the
                 instructions on the following pages should apply to it as well.
                      When you run Electrum the first time, you’ll be asked to create a new
                 wallet (or restore an old wallet, which we’ll ignore for now), as shown in
                 Figure 2-3.




                 Figure 2-3: Creating a new Bitcoin wallet with Electrum

                      The next step is specific to Electrum; that is, it is not a standard fea-
                 ture of most Bitcoin wallet programs. The application presents you with
                 a seed, which consists of 12 randomly chosen words, and asks you to write
                 them down (see Figure 2-4). Electrum uses this seed to create your Bitcoin
                 addresses and private keys; therefore, the seed must be kept secret, similar
                 to your private keys. Because we’ll be dealing with only small amounts of bit-
                 coins in this chapter, you don’t need to be too careful just yet. However, you
                 should start keeping these security details in mind. A major benefit of a seed
                 is that if you lose your computer (say, in a fire or theft), everything—your
                 wallet, your Bitcoin address, your private keys, and (most importantly) your
                 money—can be recovered from the seed.
                      The next step gives you the option of creating a password. Although
                 the password is optional, it is very important. If your computer is stolen or
                 somehow falls into the wrong hands, the password prevents others from
                 spending your bitcoins. Because Electrum (and other Bitcoin wallet pro-
                 grams) uses the password to store your Bitcoin wallet on your computer in
                 an encrypted form, the wallet is useless without the password. With many
                 other Bitcoin wallet programs if you forget your password, you could per-
                 manently lose access to your wallet. But with Electrum, you can restore the
                 wallet from your seed (without needing the password).


14   Chapter 2
Figure 2-4: Electrum presents you with a seed.

   In the final step, Electrum requests instructions on how to connect to a
remote server. Select Auto connect and then click Next (see Figure 2-5).




Figure 2-5: Selecting your server connection

     You should see a screen similar to the one in Figure 2-6. The green dot
in the bottom-right corner indicates that you are connected to the Bitcoin
network. Congratulations! You’ve just set up your first Bitcoin wallet! Now
you can fill the wallet with bitcoins.




                                                               Bitcoin Basics   15
                 Figure 2-6: Here is your first Bitcoin wallet!



                 Acquiring Bitcoins in Your Wallet
                 On the Receive tab (see Figure 2-7), you should see a list of several Bitcoin-
                 receiving addresses.




                 Figure 2-7: The Receive tab

                     You can share these addresses with your friends so they can send you
                 some starting bitcoins—one way to acquire bitcoins! At this point, if you
                 want to put significant money into bitcoins, refer to Chapter 4 where we dis-
                 cuss how to do this in detail (but be sure to first read Chapter 3, for security
                 reasons).



16   Chapter 2
            To get a small quantity of bitcoins into your wallet—whether from a
       friend or from a site listed on http://newbiecoins.com/—you’ll have to give
       that friend or website one of your public Bitcoin addresses. At the time of
       this writing, a small amount of Bitcoin for testing would be about 0.5 milli-
       bitcoin (mBTC). If at the time you are reading, 0.5 mBTC is a lot of money,
       then feel free to use a smaller amount. A few minutes after your friend
       (or the site) sends these coins, you should see a balance of 0.5 mBTC in
       your Electrum wallet. (Actually, your balance will usually update instanta-
       neously.) Well done! You now own bitcoins, which enables you to look into
       your future! How? Read on.

NOTE   Importing private Bitcoin keys into a wallet can be hazardous. You should only
       import money using private keys when small sums of money are involved, and never
       use this method as part of a strategy for managing larger sums of money unless you’re
       an advanced bitcoiner. The comic at the end of this chapter illustrates why working
       with raw private Bitcoin keys can be very dangerous.


       Spending Bitcoins with Your Wallet
       Although thousands of merchants now accept bitcoins, you can’t buy much
       with 0.5 mBTC. You’ll need to scour the Internet for good deals!
            Alternatively, for the deal of the century, you can have your fortune
       read online for the low, low price of 0.1 mBTC.
            Visit http://befuddled.org/ to access our fortune-telling website, which
       we’ve linked directly to a crystal ball. When you send 0.1 mBTC to the
       server’s Bitcoin address, the server transmits a fortune request to the crystal
       ball, and it predicts your future.




                                                                             Bitcoin Basics   17
                     To get your fortune, use Electrum’s Send function and paste the
                 website’s Bitcoin address into the Pay to field. In the Amount field, specify
                 0.1 mBTC (if your units are set to BTC, enter 0.0001; change the default
                 units by choosing Tools4Preferences4Base Unit). Bitcoin transactions also
                 require a fee. In the Fee field, enter 0.1 mBTC as well (this amount may be
                 more than is necessary, but let’s not worry about that for now). Your screen
                 should look something like Figure 2-8.




                 Figure 2-8: Sending bitcoins through Electrum

                      When you click Send, Electrum asks for your password and then con-
                 firms that the transaction has been transmitted. Almost immediately, you
                 should see your fortune on the website. Welcome to the future! You’ve just
                 made your first Bitcoin transaction!
                      Electrum’s History section shows you the transactions you’ve made in
                 the past. Transactions that display the word pending are not yet recorded
                 on the Bitcoin public ledger (which typically occurs about 10 minutes after
                 a transaction is sent).
                      If you’re not interested in your fortune but want to practice send-
                 ing bitcoins, you’ll be pleased to know that many charities and nonprofit
                 organizations now accept bitcoins. Some provide food for the homeless,
                 defend online privacy rights, and support open source software (including
                 Bitcoin). By searching online, you’ll find numerous nonprofit organizations
                 that have posted a Bitcoin address. We recommend giving your free mil-
                 libitcoins to Sean’s Outpost, a charity that feeds the homeless in Pensacola,
                 Florida (its donation Bitcoin address can be found on its website, http://
                 seansoutpost.com/). Unlike with the fortune-telling website, you might not




18   Chapter 2
        receive a response from the website when you donate. But rest assured that
        the recipients have accepted your bitcoins if Electrum’s History section
        displays the word confirmed. (Sometimes the confirmation status is indi-
        cated by a small dial icon or more than one confirmation is given for the
        transaction.)
            You might be wondering how and where Electrum got a Bitcoin
        address. The answer is your Bitcoin wallet program.

        Bitcoin Addresses Generated by Your Bitcoin Wallet Program
        When you run a Bitcoin wallet program, it can generate a new Bitcoin
        address for you offline. No communication with the Bitcoin network is nec-
        essary, an unusual feature that surprises many people. With other addresses
        or numbers, for example, when you create a new email address, you must
        first find out whether the address is being used by someone else. The same
        is true when get a new phone number or when you open an account at a
        bank. However, when you want a new Bitcoin address, one is chosen at ran-
        dom from all of the possible Bitcoin addresses. What are the odds that a
        Bitcoin address randomly generated for you will be the same as one gener-
        ated by someone else? We’ll use an analogy: Consider all the grains of sand
        on Earth—from all the beaches and deserts. When you choose a single
        grain at random to be yours and another person chooses a grain of sand at
        random to be his, the odds that both of you would choose the same grain
        of sand would be over a trillion times more likely than the odds that you
        both generate the same Bitcoin address.6
             While you can create Bitcoin addresses offline, you must be online to
        see how much money is in your addresses or to send money to others. That’s
        because these additional actions require you to access the public ledger of
        Bitcoin, which we’ll discuss next.


The Blockchain
        All Bitcoin transactions are recorded into the blockchain. Throughout the
        remainder of this book, we’ll refer to the Bitcoin ledger as the blockchain.
        The reason for its name is that new transactions are appended to the ledger
        in large chunks, or blocks. Whenever a new Bitcoin transaction is broadcast
        to the network, computers on the network add it to a growing pool of other
        new transactions. Then, about every 10 minutes, the transactions in that
        pool are bundled into a block and added to the blockchain (see Figure 2-9).
        To function properly, all Bitcoin wallet programs need access to an up-to-
        date copy of the blockchain, and every time a block is added, the wallet pro-
        grams copy and add the block to their own blockchain.




        6. Odds of a trillion times more likely are still a dramatic understatement. The possible value
        of Bitcoin addresses is 2160 (~1048), and the number of grains of sand on Earth is approxi-
        mately 1019.

                                                                                       Bitcoin Basics   19
        Transactions from                Transactions from                           Transactions from               Transactions from
      about 40 minutes ago             about 30 minutes ago                        about 20 minutes ago            about 10 minutes ago
       transaction ID: 100                  transaction ID: 520                     transaction ID: 734             transaction ID: 1100
       address 1aaaa -2.0 BTC               address 1eeee -5.0 BTC                  address 1bbbb -0.2 BTC          address 1eeee -9.0 BTC
       address 1bbbb +2.0 BTC               address 1cccc +4.8 BTC                  address 1aaaa +0.1 BTC          address 1cccc +4.8 BTC
       transaction ID: 101                  address 1ffff +0.1 BTC                  address 1ffff +0.1 BTC          address 1ffff +0.1 BTC
       address 1cccc -3.0 BTC               address 1aaaa +0.1 BTC                  transaction ID: 735             address 1aaaa +0.1 BTC
       address 1aaaa +2.0 BTC               transaction ID: 521                     address 1gggg -0.1 BTC          address 1abcd +4.0 BTC
       address 1dddd +1.0 BTC               address 1eeee -5.0 BTC                  address 1hhhh +0.1 BTC          transaction ID: 1101
       transaction ID: 102                  address 1cccc +4.8 BTC                  transaction ID: 736             address 1gggg -0.1 BTC
       address 1aaaa -2.0 BTC               address 1ffff +0.1 BTC                  address 1aaaa -1.0 BTC          address 1hhhh +0.1 BTC
       address 1bbbb +2.0 BTC               address 1aaaa +0.1 BTC                  address 1abcd +1.0 BTC
                 ⁞                                     ⁞                                          ⁞                           ⁞
      Transactions right now                                                           1aaaa -2
                                                                                                 .2 BTC            Block will be added
                                                                              address     dd d +2.2 BT
                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                     to the chain soon
                                   .5 BTC                                            s 1d
                         1cccc -0                                             addres
                 address    dd d +0.5 BTC                                                                           transaction ID: 1544
                         1d                                                  just exchanged
                 address                                                                                            address 1gggg -6.0 BTC
                                                                             bitcoins for euros                     address 1hhhh +6.0 BTC
                                                                                                         .0 BTC
                                                                  .0 BTC                       1gggg -6
                                                        1eeee -8                       address       h +6 .0 BTC
                                             address               .5 BTC              address
                                                                                               1h hh
        just bought a                              es s 1eaaa +2
                                             ad dr
                                                            cc c +1 .5 BTC
        laptop online                         address
                                                         1e
                                                         1e dd d +1.5 BTC
                                              address
                                                                                   just sent money to
           just bought a pie                                                       his mom overseas
           from his neighbor         just paid his
                                     employees

Figure 2-9: Bitcoin transactions are grouped into blocks that are added to the blockchain every 10 minutes.

                             The thousands of computers on the Bitcoin network that collect trans-
                        actions and add them to the blockchain are called miners. We’ll explain
                        miners and the details of what they do later in the chapter. For now, keep in
                        mind that anyone can be a miner (including you) by running open source
                        Bitcoin-mining software on a computer that is connected to the Bitcoin net-
                        work. At any given moment, tens of thousands of miners are connected to
                        the Bitcoin network. All volunteer their computers for the purpose of add-
                        ing new transactions to the blockchain (we’ll explain why they do this in a
                        moment).
                             Every block added to the blockchain is added by a single miner on
                        the network. Then everyone else on the Bitcoin network follows suit and
                        updates their own copy of the blockchain (this includes other miners and
                        Bitcoin wallet programs). Why does only one miner add a block, and how is
                        it decided which of the thousands of miners it is? This is where Bitcoin gets
                        interesting—and a little technical.
                             Let’s first consider why anyone would want to update the blockchain.
                        Certainly, if you wanted to complete transactions, your Bitcoin wallet pro-
                        gram would need the latest copy of the blockchain. However, you might
                        not want to send or receive bitcoins for months, so why bother updating
                        your copy of the blockchain in the meantime? For the Bitcoin system to
                        work, many people need to keep up-to-date copies of the blockchain. The
                        reason is that if only one person had the latest copy, she could manipulate
                        the number of bitcoins people had on record. Therefore, good will alone
                        isn’t sufficient to keep the system running. But the lure of a reward is
                        always an attraction.




20   Chapter 2
                  The Blockchain Lottery
                  As an incentive for users to update the blockchain as frequently as possible,
                  Bitcoin uses a lottery-based reward system. Many people become miners
                  and try to be the first to add a block to the blockchain. Then, based on
                  some probability, a winner is chosen and gets to add a block.
                        What is the purpose of using a lottery like this to run Bitcoin? Well,
                  let’s imagine Crowley wants to buy a $10,000 car from Clarice. (You’ll learn
                  more about our friend Crowley the Crocodile in the comic in Chapter 5.)
                  Using traditional currency, two people engaging in this transaction would
                  probably go to a bank and have the money transferred between their
                  bank accounts (or use a cashier’s check, which is analogous to this; see
                  Figure 2-10).




Figure 2-10: Crowley sending $10,000 to Clarice through a traditional bank

                       They would do this at a bank because they need a trusted third party (a
                  “banker”) that manages a “money ledger” and moves the money on the led-
                  ger from one person’s account to another. The banker’s job is to make an
                  announcement that Crowley and Clarice can trust; that is, to affirm that the
                  ledger has been updated correctly. (The banker may or may not be sporting
                  a monocle, wearing a top hat, and smoking a cigar.)
                       With Bitcoin, we also need a person to adjust a ledger, which in this
                  case means adjusting the blockchain by adding a block to it. It turns out
                  anyone can fill this role, as long as he is not connected with either party in
                  the transaction, because that could lead to a conflict of interest. Picking a
                  person randomly through a lottery helps accomplish this. So with Bitcoin, a
                  lottery picks a random miner, who then announces to the network that cer-
                  tain Bitcoin transactions are valid (see Figure 2-11).
                       Of course, there’s always a small chance this miner does know one of the
                  persons involved in a recent transaction. This is why blocks are arranged in
                  a chain: In roughly 10 minutes, when the next lottery winner is announced,
                  this winner also confirms, as part of her announcement, that she agrees
                  with all the transactions of the previous lottery winner (see Figure 2-12).




                                                                                  Bitcoin Basics   21
                 Figure 2-11: A random person running Bitcoin-mining software is chosen to confirm
                 Bitcoin transactions.

                     In the process, each winner in the Bitcoin-mining lottery receives a
                 reward, which is a certain amount of bitcoins. The reward includes all of
                 the transaction fees for the transactions in that block, which motivates
                 miners to collect as many transactions into a block as possible, increasing
                 their reward. To be eligible for the reward from the next block, which is
                 added 10 minutes later, a miner needs to have the latest copy of the block-
                 chain to participate in the next round. This process is done automatically
                 by open source Bitcoin-mining software that runs on computers controlled
                 by the people involved in mining. Because of this incentive structure, thou-
                 sands of miners constantly help process the transactions of Bitcoin users,
                 making sure that the blockchain is always up-to-date.
                     The reward lottery is run by the community; no central authority
                 exists to choose a winner. We’ll skip the technical details for now (they’re
                 covered in Chapter 8) and just say that miners generate random numbers
                 continuously, until they find a winning one. This takes about ten minutes.
                 The community then verifies (also through cryptography) that the num-
                 ber found by the individual miner is the winner, and the miner adds a new
                 block to the blockchain and collects the reward. When this happens, the
                 phrase commonly used is that a miner has found a block.




22   Chapter 2
Figure 2-12: With Bitcoin, each lottery winner confirms not only her own block of
transactions, but also all the preceding blocks (that she considers to be valid).



Blockchain Forking
The lottery system works as expected most of the time. But occasionally two
miners find a block at the same time, and the blockchain becomes forked,
resulting in two different branches (see Figure 2-13).
    Consider the following scenario as an example: Imagine that Crowley
and Satoshi are miners and find the winning number within seconds of
each other. If they are located far apart on the Bitcoin network (say, on
opposite sides of Earth), one part of the network will identify Crowley as
the winner and another part will identify Satoshi as the winner. In this case,
Crowley and Satoshi will each add a block to the blockchain (each thinking
that he is the winning miner for that round). The problem occurs when one
part of the network copies Crowley’s block and the other copies Satoshi’s.
As a result, now two blockchains disagree!




                                                                          Bitcoin Basics   23
     The current blockchain is 10,510 blocks long...


       Block          Block        Block                 Block        Block       Block
      #10,505        #10,506      #10,507               #10,508      #10,509     #10,510


     The world waits patiently for the 10,511th block to be added to the blockchain,
     when suddenly, on opposite sides of the world...

                                  Hey everyone,
                                Crowley found a
                                 winNing number!

                                                                                              Satoshi
                                                                                           found another
                                  Wow,
                                                                                              Block!
                                congrats
                                Crowley!
                                                                                            HoOray!
     The two parts of the Bitcoin network                                                  Long live
                                                                                            Satoshi!
     initially don’t realize what happened,
     and two different blockchains coexist...


                                                         Crowley’s                                                              Satoshi’s
        Block          Block         Block                 Block                Block         Block          Block                Block
       #10,508        #10,509       #10,510              #10,511               #10,508       #10,509        #10,510             #10,511

     It takes only a few seconds for                                           About 9 minutes later, Janet, who had
     the network to realize that the                                           copied Satoshi’s block, finds a winning
     blockchain has forked...                                                  number and adds her block to Satoshi’s...
                                                 ’s                                                                      ’s
                                             ley                                                                     ley
                                           ow k                                                                    ow k
                                         Cr Bloc 11                                                              Cr Bloc 11
                                                  5                                                                       5
                                               0,                                                                      0,
                                            #1                                                                      #1
        Block        Block      Block                                           Block     Block         Block
       #10,508      #10,509    #10,510                                         #10,508   #10,509       #10,510
                                            Sa                                                                      Sa
                                               tos                                                                     tos
                                         #1 Bloc hi’s                                                            #1 Bloc hi’s
                                           0, k                                                                    0, k          Janet’s
                                             51                                                                      51
                                                1                                                                       1         Block
                                                                                                                                #10,512
     Crowley’s block is orphaned, which means that he doesn’t collect any bitcoins as a reward,
     and the transactions in his block are ignored. Satoshi’s block becomes part of the “true”
     blockchain.
     Poor Crowley! Better luck next time.

                                                                                               Satoshi’s          Janet’s
       Block          Block        Block                 Block        Block       Block         Block              Block
      #10,505        #10,506      #10,507               #10,508      #10,509     #10,510       #10,511           #10,512


Figure 2-13: Bitcoin miners Crowley and Satoshi find a block at the same time, creating two copies of the
blockchain. The resolution to the forked blockchain occurs when Satoshi’s version of the blockchain adds
another block before Crowley’s, and Satoshi receives the reward.

                            Recall that your Bitcoin wallet program needs an up-to-date copy of
                        the blockchain to function, but it doesn’t know how to resolve a forked
                        blockchain. Miners and Bitcoin wallet programs must decide which of the
                        two versions of the blockchain to use. Forking is resolved by waiting to see
                        which of the two branches adds yet another block first, which will happen
                        about 10 minutes later. Then the longer branch will be considered the true
                        blockchain, and the shorter branch will be ignored, or orphaned, by the
                        entire Bitcoin network.

24      Chapter 2
    For most users, the process of forking and ignoring orphaned blocks
goes completely unnoticed and has no negative impact on the use of Bitcoin.
In our example, only the losing miner, Crowley, experiences a considerable
impact because only one of the two miners involved can receive the reward.
The losing miner is undoubtedly disappointed, but miners expect this to
happen from time to time, so it comes as no surprise when it does.

Transaction Confirmations, Double Spending , and Irreversibility
A transaction confirmation is a common concept in Bitcoin. Some online
merchants that accept bitcoins may require one or more transaction con-
firmations before delivering their good or service. Every transaction exists
in some block on the blockchain. The blocks behind it are older, and the
blocks ahead of it are newer. The position of a block relative to the tip of
the blockchain is known as the block depth. The most recently added block
has a depth of 1, the block behind it has a depth of 2, and so on. The num-
ber of confirmations a transaction has is equal to the depth of its block.
So a transaction that has not been added to the blockchain (yet) has zero
confirmations; it has one confirmation when it is added in a new block; it has
two confirmations when a block is added ahead of it; and so on. The concept
is simple enough, but why do merchants require transaction confirmations?
     For low-value transactions, such as buying a cup of coffee, merchants
normally forgo the transaction confirmation. You just send your bitcoins,
grab your coffee, and go on your way. In general, Bitcoin transactions are
irreversible, and merchants know within a few seconds after you click Send
that you’ve paid for your drink (or whatever you’re buying). However, if a
merchant sells a high-priced item, such as a car, it becomes critical to con-
sider transaction confirmations.
     A malicious user with very significant computational resources (think
of a James Bond–style supervillain) can try to double spend his bitcoins,
which is essentially an attempt to trick the receiver into accepting bitcoins
that were simultaneously sent to someone else as well (the “someone else”
could be another Bitcoin address controlled by the supervillain). When
miners on the Bitcoin network detect two transactions that spent the same
bitcoins (but were sent to different addresses), they usually accept which-
ever one they received first and ignore the second. More important, it’s
impossible for both transactions to be added to a block because one con-
tradicts the other. The supervillain’s intent is for the merchant to ship the
car but have the transaction be ignored and not added to the blockchain.
     Fortunately, this devious scheme is usually unsuccessful because many
merchants use special monitoring software and can recognize when two
conflicting Bitcoin transactions are broadcast at the same time (at which
point the supervillain may be kicked out of the car dealership). An even
simpler solution for merchants to prevent this kind of payment fraud is to
wait 10 minutes until the transaction has at least one confirmation before
agreeing to ship the car. However, if a supervillain possesses truly extra-
ordinary resources, such as many millions of dollars of computer hardware,
he can attempt to make the Bitcoin network orphan the newest block in the


                                                                   Bitcoin Basics   25
                 blockchain, resulting in a single transaction confirmation being ignored.
                 To cope with this remote possibility, merchants who sell high-end goods
                 typically wait until a transaction has two confirmations before handing
                 over the keys to the buyer. In general, the higher the value of the item
                 being transacted, the more confirmations a merchant can demand before
                 considering the transaction to be settled. The cost for a malicious villain
                 to double spend those bitcoins rises exponentially with each confirmation.
                     Now that you know the basic function and concepts of the Bitcoin
                 blockchain, you’ll learn about mining bitcoins, which is perhaps the most
                 mysterious aspect of Bitcoin.


     Mining Bitcoins
                 Bitcoin mining is the competitive process of collecting transactions and add-
                 ing them to the blockchain in the form of blocks. Why is it called mining?
                 The term is derived from how bitcoins are initially distributed. Although the
                 total supply of bitcoins is capped at 21 million, this total is reached slowly
                 over time. In the beginning, the initial supply of bitcoins was zero. Bitcoin
                 miners receive a reward for processing other people’s transactions; each
                 reward is a small sum of newly minted bitcoins that increases the total supply
                 in circulation. In this sense, Bitcoin mining is similar to gold mining: Earth
                 has a fixed amount of gold, and miners slowly dig it out over time.
                      As mentioned earlier, miners must find a certain winning number by
                 generating numbers at random repeatedly to win these newly minted bit-
                 coins. Because fast computers can generate these random numbers more
                 rapidly, this creates an incentive for miners to use increasingly power ful
                 computers to mine bitcoins. In the very early stages of Bitcoin, personal
                 computers were commonly used to generate random numbers, but soon
                 people started building special-purpose computers designed solely for
                 Bitcoin mining. Today, mining bitcoins requires significant capital, exper-
                 tise, and access to inexpensive electricity. In fact, the evolution of Bitcoin
                 mining resembles the way gold mining has changed over times. At one time
                 unearthing gold could be done by a person panning in a riverbed, but now
                 excavation is performed by large companies with expensive drills.
                      The mining reward for finding a block has two components: The
                 first part is transaction fees. When you send bitcoins to someone, a small
                 amount of additional bitcoins is added as a transaction fee.7 Transaction
                 fees are typically a few cents and are part of the reward that miners receive
                 when they win the lottery and add a new block to the blockchain. Because a
                 block is a collection of hundreds or thousands of transactions, the miner’s
                 reward is the sum of all the transaction fees in that new block. The second
                 component of the reward is a certain number of newly minted bitcoins.
                      The number of newly minted bitcoins that is provided as a reward
                 diminishes gradually over time. The first 210,000 blocks—which based


                 7. Strictly speaking, this transaction fee is voluntary, but miners may ignore transactions that
                 have no attached fees.

26   Chapter 2
        on a 10-minute spacing took about 4 years to mine—provided every
        winning miner with 50 newly minted bitcoins per block in addition to
        the transaction fees. The next 210,000 blocks (blocks (210,001 through
        420,000) reward miners with only 25 newly minted bitcoins per block.
        Thereafter, the reward drops to 12.5, then 6.725, and so on. Because this
        mining process is the only source of new bitcoins, it is the reason no more
        than 21 million bitcoins will ever be in circulation.
             Although every four years the number of newly minted bitcoins rewarded
        per block halves, the transaction fees per block will continue to grow as the
        Bitcoin user base grows. Eventually, the user transaction fees will be greater
        than the reward of newly minted bitcoins. At that point, the Bitcoin network
        will be sustained entirely through transaction fees.


The Complexity of the Bitcoin System
        Most of us are used to using centralized payment services (e.g., PayPal, credit
        cards). We place our trust in the companies that run those services and don’t
        need to know how the payment system works. But Bitcoin doesn’t have a com-
        pany to trust; instead, we can examine the system to decide whether or not
        we trust it.
             If you investigated the system major credit card companies use to facili-
        tate payments, you might be surprised by how complicated it is. Because
        we don’t normally think about how digital payment systems work, it is not
        unusual that the Bitcoin system is befuddling and complicated to most.
        After reading this chapter, you should have a fairly good idea of how the
        entire system works. In later chapters, we’ll delve further into certain
        details, such as the specific hardware and programs that Bitcoin miners
        use; however, the overall explanation of the Bitcoin system will not change
        from how it is described in this chapter. From this point on, we can focus
        on acquiring bitcoins and thinking about how they’ll impact our global
        economy!




                                                                         Bitcoin Basics   27
