                      6
      Boot Process Securit y




            In this chapter we’ll look at two important
           security mechanisms implemented in the
          Microsoft Windows kernel: the Early Launch
       Anti-Malware (ELAM) module, introduced in
Windows 8, and the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy,
introduced in Windows Vista. Both mechanisms were
designed to prevent the execution of unauthorized
code in the kernel address space, in order to make it
harder for rootkits to compromise a system. We’ll look
at how these mechanisms are implemented, discuss
their advantages and weak points, and examine their
effectiveness against rootkits and bootkits.
     The Early Launch Anti-Malware Module
                 The Early Launch Anti-Malware (ELAM) module is a detection mecha-
                 nism for Windows systems that allows third-party security software, such as
                 anti­v irus software, to register a kernel-mode driver that is guaranteed to
                 execute very early in the boot process, before any other third-party driver
                 is loaded. Thus, when an attacker attempts to load a malicious component
                 into the Windows kernel address space, the security software can inspect
                 and prevent that malicious driver from loading since the ELAM driver is
                 already active.

                 API Callback Routines
                 The ELAM driver registers callback routines that the kernel uses to evalu-
                 ate data in the system registry hive and boot-start drivers. These callbacks
                 detect malicious data and modules and prevent them from being loaded
                 and initialized by Windows.
                     The Windows kernel registers and unregisters these callbacks by imple-
                 menting the following API routines:
                     CmRegisterCallbackEx and CmUnRegisterCallback   Register and unregister
                     callbacks for monitoring registry data
                     IoRegisterBootDriverCallback and IoUnRegisterBootDriverCallback Register
                     and unregister callbacks for boot-start drivers
                     These callback routines use the prototype EX_CALLBACK_FUNCTION, shown
                 in Listing 6-1.

                 NTSTATUS EX_CALLBACK_FUNCTION(
                  IN PVOID CallbackContext,
                  IN PVOID Argument1,          // callback type
                  IN PVOID Argument2           // system-provided context structure
                 );

                 Listing 6-1: Prototype of ELAM callbacks

                     The parameter CallbackContext  receives a context from the ELAM
                 driver once the driver has executed one of the aforementioned callback
                 routines to register a callback. The context is a pointer to a memory buffer
                 holding ELAM driver–specific parameters that may be accessed by any of
                 the callback routines. This context is a pointer that’s also used to store the
                 current state of the ELAM driver. The argument at  provides the callback
                 type, which may be either of the following for the boot-start drivers:
                     BdCbStatusUpdate  Provides status updates to an ELAM driver regarding
                     the loading of driver dependencies or boot-start drivers
                     BdCbInitializeImage Used by the ELAM driver to classify boot-start
                     drivers and their dependencies




70   Chapter 6
Classification of Boot-Start Drivers
The argument at  provides information that the operating system uses
to classify the boot-start driver as known good (drivers known to be legiti-
mate and clean), unknown (drivers that ELAM can’t classify), and known
bad (drivers known to be malicious).
     Unfortunately, the ELAM driver must base this decision on limited data
about the driver image to classify, namely:

•    The name of the image
•    The registry location where the image is registered as a boot-start
     driver
•    The publisher and issuer of the image’s certificate
•    A hash of the image and the name of the hashing algorithm
•    A certificate thumbprint and the name of the thumbprint algorithm

     The ELAM driver doesn’t receive the image’s base address, nor can
it access the binary image on the hard drive because the storage device
driver stack isn’t yet initialized (as the system hasn’t finished bootup). It
must decide which drivers to load based solely on the hash of the image
and its certificate, without being able to observe the image itself. As a con-
sequence, the protection for the drivers is not very effective at this stage.

ELAM Policy
Windows decides whether to load known bad or unknown drivers
based on the ELAM policy specified in this registry key: HKLM\System\
CurrentControlSet\Control\EarlyLaunch\DriverLoadPolicy.
    Table 6-1 lists the ELAM policy values that determine which drivers
may be loaded.

Table 6-1: ELAM Policy Values

 Policy name                           Policy value   Description
 PNP_INITIALIZE_DRIVERS_DEFAULT        0x00           Load known good drivers only.
 PNP_INITIALIZE_UNKNOWN_DRIVERS        0x01           Load known good and
                                                      unknown drivers only.
 PNP_INITIALIZE_BAD_CRITICAL_DRIVERS   0x03           Load known good, unknown,
                                                      and known bad critical drivers.
                                                      (This is the default setting.)
 PNP_INITIALIZE_BAD_DRIVERS            0x07           Load all drivers.


    As you can see, the default ELAM policy, PNP_INITIALIZE_BAD_CRITICAL​
_DRIVERS, allows the loading of bad critical drivers. This means that if a
critical driver is classified by ELAM as known bad, the system will load it




                                                                    Boot Process Security   71
                 regardless. The rationale behind this policy is that critical system drivers
                 are an essential part of the operating system, so any failure in their initial-
                 ization will render the operating system unbootable; that is, the system
                 won’t boot unless all its critical drivers are successfully loaded and initial-
                 ized. This ELAM policy therefore compromises some security in favor of
                 availability and serviceability.
                      However, this policy won’t load known bad noncritical drivers, or those
                 drivers without which the operating system can still successfully load. This
                 is the main difference between the PNP_INITIALIZE_BAD_CRITICAL_DRIVERS and
                 PNP_INITIALIZE_BAD_DRIVERS policies: the latter allows all drivers to be loaded,
                 including known bad noncritical drivers.

                 How Bootkits Bypass ELAM
                 ELAM gives security software an advantage against rootkit threats but not
                 against bootkits—nor was it designed to. ELAM can monitor only legiti-
                 mately loaded drivers, but most bootkits load kernel-mode drivers that use
                 undocumented operating system features. This means that a bootkit can
                 bypass security enforcement and inject its code into kernel address space
                 despite ELAM. In addition, as shown in Figure 6-1, a bootkit’s malicious
                 code runs before the operating system kernel is initialized and before any
                 kernel-mode driver is loaded, including ELAM. This means that a bootkit
                 can sidestep ELAM protection.
                                                                       ELAM receives control and
                                                                       checks kernel-mode drivers.




                                            bootmgr                                           Kernel-mode
                   MBR        VBR/IPL                          OS kernel          ELAM
                                           winload.exe                                          drivers


                                                                                ELAM verifies drivers.
                             Bootkit is    Bootkit patches    Bootkit injects
                             loaded.      system modules.     its code into
                                                               kernel-mode
                                                             address space.

                                                     The system is compromised.



                 Figure 6-1: The flow of the boot process with ELAM

                      Most bootkits load their kernel-mode code in the middle of kernel
                 initialization, once all OS subsystems (the I/O subsystem, object manager,
                 plug and play manager, and so forth) have been initialized but before
                 ELAM is executed. ELAM can’t prevent the execution of malicious code
                 that has been loaded before it, of course, so it has no defenses against boot-
                 kit techniques.


72   Chapter 6
Microsoft Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy
        The Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy protects the Windows operating
        system by imposing code-signing requirements for modules meant to be
        loaded into the kernel address space. This policy has made it much harder
        for bootkits and rootkits to compromise a system by executing kernel-mode
        drivers, thus pushing rootkit developers to switch to bootkit techniques
        instead. Unfortunately, as explained later in the chapter, attackers can dis-
        able the entire logic of on-load signature verification by manipulating a few
        variables that correspond to startup configuration options.

        Kernel-Mode Drivers Subject to Integrity Checks
        The signing policy was introduced in Windows Vista and has been
        enforced in all subsequent versions of Windows, though it’s enforced
        differently on 32-bit and 64-bit operating systems. It kicks in when the
        kernel-mode drivers are loaded so that it can verify their integrity before
        driver images are mapped into kernel address space. Table 6-2 shows
        which kernel-mode drivers on 64- and 32-bit systems are subject to which
        integrity checks.

        Table 6-2: Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy Requirements

        Driver type                       Subject to integrity checks?
                                          64-bit      32-bit
        Boot-start drivers                Yes         Yes
        Non-boot-start PnP drivers        Yes         No
        Non-boot-start, non-PnP drivers   Yes         No (except drivers that
                                                      stream protected media)


             As the table shows, on 64-bit systems, all kernel-mode modules, regard-
        less of type, are subject to integrity checks. On 32-bit systems, the signing pol-
        icy applies only to boot-start and media drivers; other drivers are not checked
        (PnP device installation enforces an install-time signing requirement).
             In order to comply with the code integrity requirements, drivers must
        have either an embedded Software Publisher Certificate (SPC) digital sig-
        nature or a catalog file with an SPC signature. Boot-start drivers, however,
        can have only embedded signatures because at boot time the storage device
        driver stack isn’t initialized, making the drivers’ catalog files inaccessible.

        Location of Driver Signatures
        The embedded driver signature within a PE file, such as a boot-start driver,
        is specified in the IMAGE_DIRECTORY_DATA_SECURITY entry in the PE header data
        directories. Microsoft provides APIs to enumerate and get information on
        all the certificates contained in an image, as shown in Listing 6-2.




                                                                         Boot Process Security   73
                 BOOL ImageEnumerateCertificates(
                    _In_     HANDLE FileHandle,
                    _In_     WORD TypeFilter,
                    _Out_    PDWORD CertificateCount,
                    _In_out_ PDWORD Indices,
                    _In_opt_ DWORD IndexCount
                 );
                 BOOL ImageGetCertificateData(
                    _In_    HANDLE FileHandle,
                    _In_    DWORD CertificateIndex,
                    _Out_   LPWIN_CERTIFICATE Certificate,
                    _Inout_ PDWORD RequiredLength
                 );

                 Listing 6-2: Microsoft’s API for enumerating and validating certificates

                      The Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy has increased the security
                 resilience of the system, but it does have its limitations. In the following
                 sections, we discuss some of those shortcomings and how malware authors
                 have leveraged them to bypass protections.



                        Plug a nd Pl ay De v ice Ins ta ll ation Signing Policy

                      In addition to the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy, Microsoft Windows has
                      another type of signing policy: the Plug and Play Device Installation Signing
                      Policy. It’s important not to confuse the two.
                            The requirements of the Plug and Play Device Installation Signing Policy
                      apply only to plug and play (PnP) device drivers and are enforced in order to
                      verify the identity of the publisher and the integrity of the PnP device driver
                      installation package. Verification requires that the catalog file of the driver
                      package be signed either by a Windows Hardware Quality Labs (WHQL)
                      certificate or by a third-party SPC. If the driver package doesn’t meet the
                      requirements of the PnP policy, a warning dialog prompts users to decide
                      whether to allow the driver package to be installed on their system.
                            System administrators can disable the PnP policy, allowing PnP driver
                      packages to be installed on a system without proper signatures. Also, note that
                      this policy is applied only when the driver package is installed, not when the
                      drivers are loaded. Although this may look like a TOCTOU (time of check to
                      time of use) weakness, it’s not; it simply means that a PnP driver package that
                      is successfully installed on a system won’t necessarily be loaded, because these
                      drivers are also subject to the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy check at boot.




                 The Legacy Code Integrity Weakness
                 The logic in the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy responsible for enforc-
                 ing code integrity is shared between the Windows kernel image and the
                 kernel-mode library ci.dll. The kernel image uses this library to verify the

74   Chapter 6
integrity of all modules being loaded into the kernel address space. The key
weakness of the signing process lies in a single point of failure in this code.
     In Microsoft Windows Vista and 7, a single variable in the kernel image
lies at the heart of this mechanism and determines whether integrity checks
are enforced. It looks like this:

BOOL nt!g_CiEnabled

    This variable is initialized at boot time in the kernel image routine
NTSTATUS SepInitializeCodeIntegrity(). The operating system checks to see
if it is booted into the Windows preinstallation (WinPE) mode, and if so,
the variable nt!g_CiEnabled is initialized with the FALSE (0x00) value, which
disables integrity checks.
      So, of course, attackers found that they could easily dodge the integ-
rity check by simply setting nt!g_CiEnabled to FALSE, which is exactly what
happened with the Uroburos family of malware (also known as Snake and
Turla) in 2011. Uroburos bypassed the code-signing policy by introducing
and then exploiting a vulnerability in a third-party driver. The legitimate
third-party signed driver was VBoxDrv.sys (the VirtualBox driver), and the
exploit cleared the value of the nt!g_CiEnabled variable after gaining code
execution in kernel mode, at which point any malicious unsigned driver
could be loaded on the attacked machine.



                            A Linu x V ulne r a bilit y

    This kind of weakness is not unique to Windows: attackers have disabled the
    mandatory access control enforcement in SELinux in similar ways. Specifically,
    if the attacker knows the address of the variable containing SELinux’s enforce-
    ment status, all the attacker needs to do is overwrite the value of that variable.
    Because SELinux enforcement logic tests the variable’s value before doing any
    checks, this logic will render itself inactive. A detailed analysis of this vulner-
    ability and its exploit code can be found at https://grsecurity.net/~spender/
    exploits/exploit2.txt.




    If Windows isn’t in WinPE mode, it next checks the values of the boot
options DISABLE_INTEGRITY_CHECKS and TESTSIGNING. As the name suggests,
DISABLE_INTEGRITY_CHECKS disables integrity checks. A user, on any Windows
version, can set this option manually at boot with the Boot menu option
Disable Driver Signature Enforcement. Windows Vista users can also use the
bcdedit.exe tool to set the value of the nointegritychecks option to TRUE; later
versions ignore this option in the Boot Configuration Data (BCD) when
Secure Boot is enabled (see Chapter 17 for more on Secure Boot).
    The TESTSIGNING option alters the way the operating system verifies the
integrity of kernel-mode modules. When it’s set to TRUE, certificate vali-
dation isn’t required to chain all the way up to a trusted root certificate

                                                                       Boot Process Security   75
                 authority (CA). In other words, any driver with any digital signature can be
                 loaded into kernel address space. The Necurs rootkit abuses the TESTSIGNING
                 option by setting it to TRUE and loading its kernel-mode driver, signed with a
                 custom certificate.
                     For years, there have been browser bugs that failed to follow the inter-
                 mediate links in the X.509 certificate’s chains of trust to a legitimate trusted
                 CA,1 but OS module-signing schemes still don’t eschew shortcuts wherever
                 chains of trust are concerned.

                 The ci.dll Module
                 The kernel-mode library ci.dll, which is responsible for enforcing code
                 integrity policy, contains the following routines:
                      CiCheckSignedFile   Verifies the digest and validates the digital signature
                      CiFindPageHashesInCatalog Validates whether a verified system catalog
                      contains the digest of the first memory page of the PE image
                      CiFindPageHashesInSignedFile Verifies the digest and validates the digital
                      signature of the first memory page of the PE image
                      CiFreePolicyInfo Frees memory allocated by the functions
                      CiVerifyHashInCatalog, CiCheckSignedFile, CiFindPageHashesInCatalog,
                      and CiFindPageHashesInSignedFile
                      CiGetPEInformation Creates an encrypted communication channel
                      between the caller and the ci.dll module
                      CiInitialize Initializes the capability of ci.dll to validate PE image file
                      integrity
                      CiVerifyHashInCatalog Validates the digest of the PE image contained
                      within a verified system catalog
                     The routine CiInitialize is the most important one for our purposes,
                 because it initializes the library and creates its data context. We can see its
                 prototype corresponding to Windows 7 in Listing 6-3.

                 NTSTATUS CiInitialize(
                  IN ULONG CiOptions;
                    PVOID Parameters;
                  OUT PVOID g_CiCallbacks;
                 );

                 Listing 6-3: Prototype of the CiInitialize routine

                     The CiInitialize routine receives as parameters the code integrity
                 options (CiOptions)  and a pointer to an array of callbacks (OUT PVOID
                 g_CiCallbacks) , the routines of which it fills in upon output. The kernel
                 uses these callbacks to verify the integrity of kernel-mode modules.




                 1. See Moxie Marlinspike, “Internet Explorer SSL Vulnerability,” https://moxie.org/ie-ssl-chain.txt.

76   Chapter 6
     The CiInitialize routine also performs a self-check to ensure that no
one has tampered with it. The routine then proceeds to verify the integrity
of all the drivers in the boot-driver list, which essentially contains boot-start
drivers and their dependencies.
     Once initialization of the ci.dll library is complete, the kernel uses
callbacks in the g_CiCallbacks buffer to verify the integrity of the modules.
In Windows Vista and 7 (but not Windows 8), the SeValidateImageHeader
routine decides whether a particular image passes the integrity check.
Listing 6-4 shows the algorithm underlying this routine.

NTSTATUS SeValidateImageHeader(Parameters) {
   NTSTATUS Status = STATUS_SUCCESS;
   VOID Buffer = NULL;
 if (g_CiEnabled == TRUE) {
          if (g_CiCallbacks[0] != NULL)
           Status = g_CiCallbacks[0](Parameters);
          else
             Status = 0xC0000428
   }
   else {
       Buffer = ExAllocatePoolWithTag(PagedPool, 1, 'hPeS');
          *Parameters = Buffer
          if (Buffer == NULL)
             Status = STATUS_NO_MEMORY;
   }
   return Status;
}

Listing 6-4: Pseudocode of the SeValidateImageHeader routine

    SeValidateImageHeader checks to see if the nt!g_CiEnabled variable is set to
TRUE . If not, it tries to allocate a byte-length buffer  and, if it succeeds,
returns a STATUS_SUCCESS value.
    If nt!g_CiEnabled is TRUE, then SeValidateImageHeader executes the first
callback in the g_CiCallbacks buffer, g_CiCallbacks[0] , which is set to the
CiValidateImageData routine. The later callback CiValidateImageData verifies
the integrity of the image being loaded.

Defensive Changes in Windows 8
With Windows 8, Microsoft made a few changes designed to limit the kinds
of attacks possible in this scenario. First, Microsoft deprecated the kernel
variable nt!g_CiEnabled, leaving no single point of control over the integrity
policy in the kernel image as in earlier versions of Windows. Windows 8 also
changed the layout of the g_CiCallbacks buffer.
     Listing 6-5 (Windows 7 and Vista) and Listing 6-6 (Windows 8) show
how the layout of g_CiCallbacks differs between the OS versions.

typedef struct _CI_CALLBACKS_WIN7_VISTA {
 PVOID CiValidateImageHeader;
 PVOID CiValidateImageData;


                                                               Boot Process Security   77
                  PVOID CiQueryInformation;
                 } CI_CALLBACKS_WIN7_VISTA, *PCI_CALLBACKS_WIN7_VISTA;

                 Listing 6-5: Layout of g_CiCallbacks buffer in Windows Vista and Windows 7

                     As you can see in Listing 6-5, the Windows Vista and Windows 7 layout
                 includes just the necessary basics. The Windows 8 layout (Listing 6-6), on
                 the other hand, has more fields for additional callback functions for PE
                 image digital signature validation.

                 typedef struct _CI_CALLBACKS_WIN8 {
                     ULONG ulSize;
                     PVOID CiSetFileCache;
                     PVOID CiGetFileCache;
                   PVOID CiQueryInformation;
                   PVOID CiValidateImageHeader;
                   PVOID CiValidateImageData;
                     PVOID CiHashMemory;
                     PVOID KappxIsPackageFile;
                 } CI_CALLBACKS_WIN8, *PCI_CALLBACKS_WIN8;

                 Listing 6-6: Layout of g_CiCallbacks buffer in Windows 8.x

                     In addition to the function pointers CiQueryInformation , CiValidate
                 ImageHeader , and CiValidateImageData , which are present in both
                 CI_CALLBACKS_WIN7_VISTA and CI_CALLBACKS_WIN8 structures, CI_CALLBACKS_WIN8
                 also has fields that affect how code integrity is enforced in Windows 8.



                                         F ur the r Re a ding on ci.dll

                      More information on the implementation details of the ci.dll module can be
                      found at https://github.com/airbus-seclab/warbirdvm. This article delves into
                      the implementation details of the encrypted memory storage used within ci.dll
                      module, which may be used by other OS components to keep certain details
                      and configuration information secret. This storage is protected by a heavily
                      obfuscated virtual machine (VM), making it much harder to reverse engineer
                      the storage encryption/decryption algorithm. The authors of the article pro-
                      vide a detailed analysis of the VM obfuscation method, and they share their
                      Windbg plug-in for decrypting and encrypting the storage on the fly.




     Secure Boot Technology
                 Secure Boot technology was introduced in Windows 8 to protect the
                 boot process against bootkit infection. Secure Boot leverages the Unified
                 Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) to block the loading and execution
                 of any boot application or driver without a valid digital signature in order


78   Chapter 6
        to protect the integrity of the operating system kernel, system files, and
        boot-critical drivers. Figure 6-2 shows the boot process with Secure Boot
        enabled.

                       Secure Boot                                  Code Integrity Protection

                                       bootmgr                                             Kernel-mode
           BIOS         UEFI                              OS kernel         ELAM
                                      winload.exe                                            drivers




                      Bootkit is      Bootkit patches    Bootkit injects
                      loaded.        system modules.     its code into
                                                          kernel-mode
                                                        address space.

        Figure 6-2: The flow of the boot process with Secure Boot

             When Secure Boot is enabled, the BIOS verifies the integrity of all UEFI
        and OS boot files executed at startup to ensure that they come from a legiti-
        mate source and have a valid digital signature. The signatures on all boot-
        critical drivers are checked in winload.exe and by the ELAM driver as part
        of Secure Boot verification. Secure Boot is similar to the Microsoft Kernel-
        Mode Code Signing Policy, but it applies to modules that are executed before
        the operating system kernel is loaded and initialized. As a result, untrusted
        components (that is, ones without valid signatures) will not be loaded and
        will trigger remediation.
             When the system first starts, Secure Boot ensures that the preboot envi-
        ronment and bootloader components aren’t tampered with. The bootloader,
        in turn, validates the integrity of the kernel and boot-start drivers. Once the
        kernel passes the integrity validations, Secure Boot verifies other drivers and
        modules. Fundamentally, Secure Boot relies on the assumption of a root of
        trust—the idea that early in execution, a system is trustworthy. Of course, if
        attackers manage to execute an attack before that point, they probably win.
             Over the last few years, the security research community has focused con-
        siderable attention on BIOS vulnerabilities that can allow attackers to bypass
        Secure Boot. We’ll discuss these vulnerabilities in detail in Chapter 16 and
        delve into Secure Boot in more detail in Chapter 17.


Virtualization-Based Security in Windows 10
        Up until Windows 10, code integrity mechanisms were part of the system
        kernel itself. That essentially means that the integrity mechanism runs with
        the same privilege level that it is trying to protect. While this can be effec-
        tive in many cases, it also means it is possible for an attacker to attack the
        integrity mechanism itself. To increase the effectiveness of the code integrity


                                                                                  Boot Process Security   79
                 mechanism, Windows 10 introduced two new features: Virtual Secure Mode
                 and Device Guard, both of which are based on memory isolation assisted
                 by hardware. This technology is generally referred to as Second Level Address
                 Translation, and it is included in both Intel (where it is known as Extended
                 Page Tables, or EPT) and AMD (where it’s called Rapid Virtualization
                 Indexing, or RVI) CPUs.

                 Second Level Address Translation
                 Windows has supported Second Level Address Translation (SLAT) since
                 Windows 8 with Hyper-V (a Microsoft hypervisor). Hyper-V uses SLAT
                 to perform memory management (for example, access protection) for
                 virtual machines and to reduce the overhead of translating guest physical
                 addresses (memory isolated by virtualization technologies) to real physical
                 addresses.
                      SLAT provides hypervisors with an intermediary cache of virtual-to-
                 physical address translation, which drastically reduces the amount of time
                 the hypervisor takes to service translation requests to the physical memory
                 of the host. It’s also used in the implementation of Virtual Secure Mode
                 technology in Windows 10.

                 Virtual Secure Mode and Device Guard
                 Virtual Secure Mode (VSM) virtualization-based security first appeared in
                 Windows 10 and is based on Microsoft’s Hyper-V. When VSM is in place,
                 the operating system and critical system modules are executed in isolated
                 hypervisor-protected containers. This means that even if the kernel is com-
                 promised, critical components executed in other virtual environments are
                 still secure because an attacker cannot pivot from one compromised virtual
                 container to another. VSM also isolates the code integrity components from
                 the Windows kernel itself in a hypervisor-protected container.
                       VSM isolation makes it impossible to use vulnerable legitimate kernel-
                 mode drivers to disable code integrity (unless a vulnerability is found that
                 affects the protection mechanism itself). Because the potentially vulnerable
                 driver and the code integrity libraries are located in separate virtual con-
                 tainers, attackers should not be able to turn code integrity protection off.
                       Device Guard technology leverages VSM to prevent untrusted code
                 from running on the system. To make these assurances, Device Guard
                 combines VSM-protected code integrity with platform and UEFI Secure
                 Boot. In doing so, Device Guard enforces the code integrity policy from
                 the very beginning of the boot process all the way up to loading OS kernel-
                 mode drivers and user-mode applications.
                       Figure 6-3 shows how Device Guard affects Windows 10’s ability to pro-
                 tect against bootkits and rootkits. Secure Boot protects from bootkits by
                 verifying any firmware components executed in the preboot environment,




80   Chapter 6
                  including the OS bootloader. To prevent malicious code from being injected
                  into the kernel-mode address space, the VSM isolates the critical OS com-
                  ponents responsible for enforcing code integrity (known as Hypervisor-
                  Enforced Code Integrity, or HVCI, in this context) from the OS kernel
                  address space.

                                                         Virtual Secure Mode (VSM)

                                                   Secure
                                                                       HVCI
                                                   kernel


                                                                  Device Guard

                                                              Hypervisor-Enforced
              Secure Boot                                   Code Integrity Protection

                              bootmgr                                              Kernel-mode
  BIOS         UEFI                              OS kernel           ELAM
                             winload.exe                                             drivers




             Bootkit is      Bootkit patches    Bootkit injects
             loaded.        system modules.     its code into
                                                 kernel-mode
                                               address space.

Figure 6-3: The boot process with Virtual Secure Mode and Device Guard enabled


                  Device Guard Limitations on Driver Development
                  Device Guard imposes specific requirements and limitations on the driver
                  development process, and some existing drivers will not run correctly with
                  it active. All drivers must follow these rules:

                  •       Allocate all nonpaged memory from the no-execute (NX) nonpaged
                          pool. The driver’s PE module cannot have sections that are both
                          writable and executable.
                  •       Do not attempt direct modification of executable system memory.
                  •       Do not use dynamic or self-modifying code in kernel mode.
                  •       Do not load any data as executable.

                      Because most modern rootkits and bootkits do not adhere to these
                  requirements, they cannot run with Device Guard active, even if the driver
                  has a valid signature or is able to bypass code integrity protection.




                                                                                         Boot Process Security   81
     Conclusion
                 This chapter has provided an overview of the evolution of code integrity
                 protections. Boot process security is the most important frontier in defend-
                 ing operating systems against malware attacks. ELAM and code integrity
                 protections are powerful security features that restrict the execution of
                 untrusted code on the platform.
                      Windows 10 took boot process security to a new level, preventing code
                 integrity bypasses by isolating HVCI components from the OS kernel with
                 VSM. However, without an active Secure Boot mechanism in place, boot-
                 kits can circumvent these protections by attacking a system before they are
                 loaded. In the following chapters, we’ll discuss Secure Boot in more detail
                 and the BIOS attacks designed to evade it.




82   Chapter 6
