               HOW THE INTERNE T WORKS
                                       2
                   To become an expert on web security, you
                   need a firm grasp of the internet’s under-
                 lying web technologies and protocols. This
              chapter examines the Internet Protocol Suite,
        which dictates how computers exchange data over the
        web. You’ll also learn about stateful connections and
        encryption, which are key elements of the modern web. I’ll highlight where
        security holes tend to appear along the way.


The Internet Protocol Suite
        In the early days of the internet, data exchange wasn’t reliable. The first
        message sent over the Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET),
        the predecessor to the internet, was a LOGIN command destined for a remote
        computer at Stanford University. The network sent the first two letters,
        LO, and then crashed. This was a problem for the US military, which was
                looking for a way to connect remote computers so that they could continue
                to exchange information even if a Soviet nuclear strike took various parts of
                the network offline.
                      To address this problem, the network engineers developed the Transmission
                Control Protocol (TCP) to ensure a reliable exchange of information between
                computers. TCP is one of about 20 network protocols that are collectively
                referred to as the internet protocol suite. When a computer sends a message
                to another machine via TCP, the message is split into data packets that are
                sent toward their eventual destination with a destination address. The com-
                puters that make up the internet push each packet toward the destination
                without having to process the whole message.
                      Once the recipient computer receives the packets, it assembles them
                back into a usable order according to the sequence number on each packet.
                Every time the recipient receives a packet, it sends a receipt. If the recipient
                fails to acknowledge receipt of a packet, the sender resends that packet, pos-
                sibly along a different network path. In this way, TCP allows computers to
                deliver data across a network that is expected to be unreliable.
                      TCP has undergone significant improvements as the internet has grown.
                Packets are now sent with a checksum that allows recipients to detect data
                corruption and determine whether packets need to be resent. Senders also
                preemptively adjust the rate at which they send data according to how fast
                it’s being consumed. (Internet servers are usually magnitudes more power-
                ful than the clients that receive their messages, so they need to be careful
                not to overwhelm the client’s capacity.)

        NOTE    TCP remains the most common protocol because of its delivery guarantees, but
                nowadays, several other protocols are also used over the internet. The User Datagram
                Protocol (UDP), for instance, is a newer protocol that deliberately allows packets to
                be dropped so that data can be streamed at a constant rate. UDP is commonly used for
                streaming live video, since consumers prefer a few dropped frames over having their
                feed delayed when the network gets congested.


                Internet Protocol Addresses
                Data packets on the internet are sent to Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, num-
                bers assigned to individual internet-connected computers. Each IP address
                must be unique, so new IP addresses are issued in a structured fashion.
                    At the highest level, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
                Numbers (ICANN) allots blocks of IP addresses to regional authorities. These
                regional authorities then grant the blocks of addresses to internet service pro-
                viders (ISPs) and hosting companies within their region. When you connect
                your browser to the internet, your ISP assigns your computer an IP address
                that stays fixed for a few months. (ISPs tend to rotate IP addresses for clients
                periodically.) Similarly, companies that host content on the internet are
                assigned an IP address for each server they connect to the network.
                    IP addresses are binary numbers, generally written in IP version 4
                (IPv4) syntax, which allows for 232 (4,294,967,296) addresses. Google’s


6   Chapter 2
        domain name server, for instance, has the address 8.8.8.8. Because IPv4
        addresses are getting used up at a rate that isn’t sustainable, the internet is
        shifting to IP version 6 (IPv6) addresses to allow for more connected devices,
        represented as eight groups of four hexadecimal digits separated by colons
        (for example: 2001:0db8:0000:0042:0000:8a2e:0370:7334).

        The Domain Name System
        Browsers and other internet-connected software can recognize and route
        traffic to IP addresses, but IP addresses aren’t particularly memorable for
        humans. To make website addresses friendlier to users, we use a global
        directory called the Domain Name System (DNS) to translate human-readable
        domains like example.com to IP addresses like 93.184.216.119. Domain names
        are simply placeholders for IP addresses. Domain names, like IP addresses,
        are unique, and have to be registered before use with private organizations
        called domain registrars.
             When browsers encounter a domain name for the first time, they use a
        local domain name server (typically hosted by an ISP) to look it up, and then
        cache the result to prevent time-consuming lookups in the future. This
        caching behavior means that new domains or changes to existing domains
        take a while to propagate on the internet. Exactly how long this propaga-
        tion takes is controlled by the time-to-live (TTL) variable, which is set on the
        DNS record and instructs DNS caches when to expire the record. DNS cach-
        ing enables a type of attack called DNS poisoning, whereby a local DNS cache
        is deliberately corrupted so that data is routed to a server controlled by an
        attacker.
             In addition to returning IP addresses for particular domains, domain
        name servers host records that can describe domain aliases via canonical name
        (CNAME) records that allow multiple domain names to point to the same IP
        address. DNS can also help route email by using mail exchange (MX) records.
        We’ll examine how DNS records can help combat unsolicited email (spam)
        in Chapter 16.


Application Layer Protocols
        The technical standards used for communication on the internet, including
        TCP, are defined and developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).
        These standards are called the internet protocol suite. TCP allows two comput-
        ers to reliably exchange data on the internet, but it doesn’t dictate how the
        data being sent should be interpreted. For that to happen, both computers
        need to agree to exchange information through another, higher-level pro-
        tocol in the suite. Protocols that build on top of TCP (or UDP) are called
        application layer protocols. Figure 2-1 illustrates how application layer proto-
        cols sit above TCP in the internet protocol suite.
             The lower-level protocols of the internet protocol suite provide basic
        data routing over a network, while the higher-level protocols in the applica-
        tion layer provide more structure for applications exchanging data. Many
        types of applications use TCP as a transport mechanism on the internet.

                                                                    How the Internet Works   7
                  For example, emails are sent using the Simple Mail Transport Protocol
                  (SMTP), instant messaging software often uses the Extensible Messaging
                  and Presence Protocol (XMPP), file servers make downloads available
                  via the File Transfer Protocol (FTP), and web servers use the HyperText
                  Transfer Protocol (HTTP). Because the web is our chief focus, let’s look
                  at HTTP in more detail.

                  Application layer   DNS       FTP          HTTP   IMAP     POP     SMTP          SSH    XMPP


                  Transport layer                     TCP                                   UDP


                  Internet layer                      IPv4                                  IPv6


                  Network layer         ARP              MAC           NDP            OSPF               PPP


                  Figure 2-1: The various layers that make up the internet protocol suite


                  HyperText Transfer Protocol
                  Web servers use the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) to transport web
                  pages and their resources to user agents such as web browsers. In an HTTP
                  conversation, the user agent generates requests for particular resources. Web
                  servers, expecting these requests, return responses containing either the
                  requested resource, or an error code if the request can’t be fulfilled. Both
                  HTTP requests and responses are plaintext messages, though they’re often
                  sent in compressed and encrypted form. All of the exploits described in this
                  book use HTTP in some fashion, so it’s worth knowing how the requests
                  and responses that make up HTTP conversations work in detail.

                  HTTP Requests
                  An HTTP request sent by a browser consists of the following elements:
                       Method Also known as a verb, this describes the action that the user
                       agent wants the server to perform.
                       Universal resource locator (URL) This describes the resource being
                       manipulated or fetched.
                       Headers These supply metadata such as the type of content the user
                       agent is expecting or whether it accepts compressed responses.
                       Body This optional component contains any extra data that needs to
                       be sent to the server.
                       Listing 2-1 shows an HTTP request.

                  GETu http://example.com/v
                w User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_13_6)
                  AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/67.0.3396.99 Safari/537.36
                x Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml; */*


8   Chapter 2
Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate
Accept-Language: en-GB,en-US;q=0.9,en;q=0.8

Listing 2-1: A simple HTTP request

     The method u and the URL v appear on the first line. These are fol-
lowed by HTTP headers on separate lines. The User-Agent header w tells the
website the type of browser that is making the request. The Accept header x
tells the website the type of content the browser is expecting.
     GET requests are the most common type of request on the internet—
they request a particular resource on the web server, identified by a specific
URL. The response to a GET request will contain a resource: perhaps a
web page, an image, or even the results of a search request. The example
request in Listing 2-1 represents an attempt to load the home page of
example.com, and would be generated when a user types example.com in the
browser’s navigation bar.
     If the browser needs to send information to the server, rather than just
fetch data, it typically uses a POST request. When you fill out a form on a web
page and submit it, the browser sends a POST request. Because POST requests
contain information sent to the server, the browser sends that information
in a request body, after the HTTP headers.
     In Chapter 8, you’ll see why it’s important to use POST rather than GET
requests when sending data to your server. Websites that erroneously use
GET requests for doing anything other than retrieving resources are vul-
nerable to cross-site request forgery attacks.
     When writing a website, you may also encounter PUT, PATCH, and DELETE
requests. These are used to upload, edit, or delete resources on the server,
respectively, and are typically triggered by JavaScript embedded in a web
page. Table 2-1 documents a handful of other methods that are worth
knowing about.

Table 2-1: The Lesser-Known HTTP Methods

 HTTP method      Function and implementation
 HEAD             A HEAD request retrieves the same information as a GET request, but
                  instructs the server to return the response without a body (in other
                  words, the useful part). If you implement a GET method on your web
                  server, the server will generally respond to HEAD requests automatically.
 CONNECT          CONNECT initiates two-way communications. You’ll use it in your HTTP
                  client code if you ever have to connect through a proxy.
 OPTIONS          Sending an OPTIONS request lets a user agent ask what other methods
                  are supported by a resource. Your web server will generally respond
                  to OPTIONS requests by inferring which other methods you have
                  implemented.
 TRACE            A response to a TRACE request will contain an exact copy of the origi-
                  nal HTTP request, so the client can see what (if any) alterations were
                  made by intermediate servers. This sounds useful, but it’s generally
                  recommended that you turn off TRACE requests in your web server,
                  because they can act as a security hole. For instance, they can allow
                  malicious JavaScript injected into a page to access cookies that have
                  been deliberately made inaccessible to JavaScript.


                                                                      How the Internet Works   9
                       Once a web server receives an HTTP request, it replies to the user agent
                   with an HTTP response. Let’s break down how responses are structured.

                   HTTP Responses
                   HTTP responses sent back by a web server begin with a protocol descrip-
                   tion, a three-digit status code, and, typically, a status message that indicates
                   whether the request can be fulfilled. The response also contains headers
                   providing metadata that instructs the browser how to treat the content.
                   Finally, most responses contain a body that itself contains the requested
                   resource. Listing 2-2 shows the contents of a simple HTTP response.

                   HTTP/1.1u 200v OKw
                 x Content-Encoding: gzip
                   Accept-Ranges: bytes
                   Cache-Control: max-age=604800
                   Content-Type: text/html
                   Content-Length: 606

                 y <!doctype html>
                   <html>
                      <head>
                         <title>Example Domain</title>
                     z <style type="text/css">
                            body {
                               background-color: #f0f0f2;
                               font-family: "Open Sans", "Helvetica Neue", Helvetica, sans-serif;
                            }
                            div {
                               width: 600px;
                               padding: 50px;
                               background-color: #fff;
                               border-radius: 1em;
                            }
                         </style>
                      </head>
                  { <body>
                         <div>
                            <h1>Example Domain</h1>
                            <p>This domain is established to be used for illustrative examples.</p>
                            <p>
                              <a href="http://www.iana.org/domains/example">More information...</a>
                            </p>
                         </div>
                      </body>
                   </html>

                   Listing 2-2: An HTTP response from example.com, the world’s least interesting website

                       The response begins with the protocol description u, the status code v,
                   and the status message w. Status codes formatted as 2xx indicate that the
                   request was understood, accepted, and responded to. Codes formatted as



10   Chapter 2
        3xx redirect the client to a different URL. Codes formatted as 4xx indicate
        a client error: the browser generated an apparently invalid request. (The
        most common error of this type is HTTP 404 Not Found). Codes formatted as
        5xx indicate a server error: the request was valid, but the server was unable
        to fulfill the request.
             Next are the HTTP headers x. Almost all HTTP responses include a
        Content-Type header that indicates the kind of data being returned. Responses
        to GET requests also often contain a Cache-Control header to indicate that the
        client should cache large resources (for example, images) locally.
             If the HTTP response is successful, the body contains the resource the
        client was trying to access as well as HyperText Markup Language (HTML) y
        describing the structure of the requested web page. In this case, the response
        contains styling information z as well as the page content itself {. Other
        types of responses may return JavaScript code, Cascading Style Sheets
        (CSS) used for styling HTML, or binary data in the body.


Stateful Connections
        Web servers typically deal with many user agents at once, but HTTP does
        nothing to distinguish which requests are coming from which user agent.
        This wasn’t an important consideration in the early days of the internet,
        because web pages were largely read-only. Modern websites, however, often
        allow users to log in and will track their activity as they visit and interact
        with different pages. To allow for this, HTTP conversations need to be
        made stateful. A connection or conversation between a client and a server
        is stateful when they perform a “handshake” and continue to send packets
        back and forth until one of the communicating parties decides to terminate
        the connection.
              When a web server wants to keep track of which user it’s responding to
        with each request, and thus achieve a stateful HTTP conversation, it needs
        to establish a mechanism to track the user agent as it makes the subsequent
        requests. The entire conversation between a particular user agent and a
        web server is called an HTTP session. The most common way of tracking ses-
        sions is for the server to send back a Set-Cookie header in the initial HTTP
        response. This asks the user agent receiving the response to store a cookie,
        a small snippet of text data pertaining to that particular web domain. The
        user agent then returns the same data in the Cookie header of any subse-
        quent HTTP request to the web server. If implemented correctly, the con-
        tents of the cookie being passed back and forth uniquely identify the user
        agent and hence establish the HTTP session.
              Session information contained in cookies is a juicy target for hackers.
        If an attacker steals another user’s cookie, they can pretend to be that user
        on the website. Similarly, if an attacker successfully persuades a website to
        accept a forged cookie, they can impersonate any user they please. We’ll
        look at various methods of stealing and forging cookies later in the book.




                                                                  How the Internet Works   11
     Encryption
                 When the web was first invented, HTTP requests and responses were sent in
                 plaintext form, which meant they could be read by anyone intercepting the
                 data packets; this kind of interception is known as a man-in-the-middle attack.
                 Because private communication and online transactions are common on
                 the modern web, web servers and browsers protect their users from such
                 attacks by using encryption, a method of disguising the contents of messages
                 from prying eyes by encoding them during transmission.
                      To secure their communications, web servers and browsers send requests
                 and responses by using Transport Layer Security (TLS), a method of encryp-
                 tion that provides both privacy and data integrity. TLS ensures that packets
                 intercepted by a third party can’t be decrypted without the appropriate
                 encryption keys. It also ensures that any attempt to tamper with the packets
                 will be detectable, which ensures data integrity.
                      HTTP conversations conducted using TLS are called HTTP Secure
                 (HTTPS). HTTPS requires the client and server to perform a TLS hand-
                 shake in which both parties agree on an encryption method (a cipher) and
                 exchange encryption keys. Once the handshake is complete, any further
                 messages (both requests and responses) will be opaque to outsiders.
                      Encryption is a complex topic but is key to securing your website. We’ll
                 examine how to enable encryption for your website in Chapter 13.


     Summary
                 In this chapter, you learned about the plumbing of the internet. TCP
                 enables reliable communication between internet-connected computers
                 that each have an IP address. The Domain Name System provides human-
                 readable aliases for IP addresses. HTTP builds on top of TCP to send
                 HTTP requests from user agents (such as web browsers) to web servers,
                 which in turn reply with HTTP responses. Each request is sent to a specific
                 URL, and you learned about various types of HTTP methods. Web servers
                 respond with status codes, and send back cookies to initiate stateful con-
                 nections. Finally, encryption (in the form of HTTPS) can be used to secure
                 communication between a user agent and a web server.
                     In the next chapter, you’ll take a look at what happens when a web
                 browser receives an HTTP response—how a web page is rendered, and how
                 user actions can generate more HTTP requests.




12   Chapter 2
