3
HOT GLUE
NIGHTŌĆæLIGHT
IN THIS PROJECT, YOUŌĆÖLL CREATE A
TINY, CUSTOMIZED LIGHT BY USING
A HOT GLU E GUN, A SI LICON E
ICE CUBE OR BAKING MOLD, AND
AN LED. TH EN YOU ŌĆÖ LL WRITE A
PROGRAM TO MAKE TH E LIGHT
FLASH ON AN D OFF OR FADE
IN AN D OUT. YOU ŌĆÖ LL TAKE THIS
PROJ ECT FURTH ER BY ADDING
A LIGHT SENSOR TO MAKE A
NIGHT-┬ŁL IGHT THAT TURNS ON
AUTOMATICALLY IN THE DARK AND
TURNS OFF AS THE SUN COMES UP.
                              Hot glue is a type of plastic adhesive thatŌĆÖs runny when hot, so
                       itŌĆÖs ideal for filling up any shape and drying quickly into that shape.
                       Silicone molds are heat resistant, which prevents the glue from stick-
                       ing to the mold, making it easy to pop out the glue when itŌĆÖs set.
                       Figure 3-1 shows a completed light.

     Figure 3-1
R2-D2 glue gun light




                       WHAT YO U ŌĆÖL L NEED
                       Here are the items youŌĆÖll need for this project:
                       ŌĆó   Raspberry Pi
                       ŌĆó   Glue gun
                       ŌĆó   Glue sticks
                       ŌĆó   Silicone mold
                       ŌĆó   LEDs
                       ŌĆó   Female-┬Łto-┬Łfemale wires
                       ŌĆó   Breadboard
                       ŌĆó   Photoresistor (LDR)
                       ŌĆó   Resistor (between 220 and 330 ohms)
                       ŌĆó   0.1 uF capacitor

                           Choose any shape of mold that suits your fancy! Recently, I
                       made a green R2-D2 LED and a red Death Star. I also located some
                       Avengers molds, so I created a green Hulk fist that pulses, a blue
                       Captain America shield, and a red Iron Man face.




                                       50 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
    Just make sure the mold is silicone so itŌĆÖs heat resistant. In          WARNING
addition, you should know that photoresistors are also called light-┬Ł       The glue gun will get very

dependent resistors (LDRs) or photocells.                                   hot. Never touch the end
                                                                            of the gun or the glue
                                                                            until it has cooled down.
B U IL DIN G THE CU STO M N IGHT-┬ŁL I GHT                                   Also, be wary of dripping

The custom night-┬Łlight build has two stages. First, youŌĆÖll physically      glue: donŌĆÖt get it on your
                                                                            shoes, clothes, or the floor.
make the light. Second, youŌĆÖll code a program to give the light its
                                                                            Consider putting news-
instructions. LetŌĆÖs get started.
                                                                            paper down on your build
     Follow these steps to construct the light:                             surface first to protect it.

1.   Prepare the glue gun: Slide a glue stick into the glue gun, plug
     it in, and let it heat up for a few minutes. A small amount of glue
     will usually drip from the end when itŌĆÖs ready to use.
2.   Prepare the mold: Place your silicone mold onto a stable
     surface. You might want to place some paper or a dust cover
     underneath the mold to protect the surface. Ensure that the
     mold is dust free and dry.
3.   Prepare the LED: Pick up the LED and look at the two wires,
     also called legs. Notice that one is slightly longer than the other,
     as shown in Figure 3-2. The longer leg is the positive leg; the
     shorter leg is negative. This detail is important to remember
     when youŌĆÖre attaching the LED to the molded figure. If you wire
     the legs the wrong way, the circuit wonŌĆÖt close and current wonŌĆÖt
     flow through the LED, meaning the LED wonŌĆÖt light up.


                                                                            Figure 3-2
                                                                            LED legs




           Because you need to access the legs when the glue is set,
     check where you want the LED to sit in the mold before you
     add the hot glue. Do you want the legs to stick straight out, or
     maybe bend downward or outward? Your placement of the LED
     will depend on your moldŌĆÖs shape. You want your LED, including
     the legs, approximately halfway into the mold. Too far in, and the




                                             51 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
                        LED will stick out; not in far enough, and it wonŌĆÖt remain securely
                        in the glue. Roughly estimate where to place the LED.

                   4.   Add the resistor: Wrap one end of the resistor around the
                        LEDŌĆÖs longer positive leg. The resistor prevents the LED from
                        overheating and burning out.
                   5.   Add glue to the mold: When you know where you want to
                        place your LED, take it out of the mold. Then, using the pre-
                        heated glue gun, begin to slowly squeeze the glue into the mold.
                        When the mold is about 80 percent full, gently push the LED into
                        the glue, holding it by the legs. Once the glue has settled, you
                        might need to add a little more glue until the mold is full. Hold
                        on to the LED, but donŌĆÖt get hot glue on your fingers. Figure 3-3
                        shows a good position for the LED.


Figure 3-3
Filling the mold
  with hot glue




                   6.   Position and hold the LED: When the mold is full, put the glue
                        gun down. Continue to hold the LED so itŌĆÖs positioned exactly
                        where you want it while the glue dries.
                             After a few minutes, the glue will begin to turn a whitish
                        color. At this point, you can let go of the LED and let the glue
                        set for about 15 minutes. Then gently touch the glue. If itŌĆÖs no
                        longer sticky, carefully peel the mold away from the glue. If the
                        glue figure doesnŌĆÖt come out easily, you might need to leave it
                        alone for a few more minutes so it can completely set.




                                   52 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
7.   Wire up the LED: When the glue has totally set and cooled down,
     take two female-┬Łto-┬Łfemale jumper wires and attach one to each
     of the LEDŌĆÖs legs. The positive leg has the resistor wrapped
     around it, so attach the wire to the end of the resistor. Attach the
     wire from the positive, longer leg to GPIO pin 18, which is physi-
     cal pin number 12 on the Pi. Connect the shorter, negative leg
     to any one of the ground pins on the Pi: you can choose from
     physical number 9, 14, 20, 30, 34, or 39. Figure 3-4 shows the
     wiring for hooking up the LED, the positive leg is the straight leg.


                                                                            Figure 3-4
                                                                            Wiring diagram for the LED




Coding the Night-┬ŁLight
Now itŌĆÖs time to add the software. Here are the steps:

1.   Plug in and boot up your Raspberry Pi.
2.   Load Python either by opening the terminal and enter-
     ing sudo idle3 or by clicking the Pi icon and selecting
     Start’Ć┤Programming’Ć┤Python 3.
3.   From the IDLE window, select File’Ć┤New File, as shown in
     Figure 3-5.




                                             53 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
 Figure 3-5
 Opening a new
      file in IDLE




                     4.   Enter the simple code in Listing 3-1 to make the LED flash on
                          and off.

Listing 3-1             from gpiozero import LED
Flashing the LED        from time import sleep
                      ’üĄ led = LED(18)
                      ’üČ while True:
                         ’üĘ led.on()
                         ’üĖ sleep(1)
                            led.off()
                            sleep(1)


                          LetŌĆÖs look at how this code works. First, you import the LED
                     class from the gpiozero library, which contains commands to help
                     you control the LED. You also import the sleep() function. A function
                     consists of code that performs a particular task but is represented by
                     a single word (or two) that acts as the function name. When you call
                     that function name in your code, Python runs the instructions in the
                     function, sparing you from having to enter all those lines again. You
                     can name the function whatever you desire, although itŌĆÖs best to use
                     a word that describes what the function does. For example, in the
                     previous chapter, when we used the code print ("hello"), the word
                     print is a function. The IDLE editor colors all function names light
                     purple, making them easy to identify. The print() function contains
                     several code lines that display in the IDLE window the text inside
                     the parentheses. YouŌĆÖll use the print() function a lot in many of the
                     chapters.
                          The sleep() function adds a delay between instructions. This
                     means you can flash the LED on and off at different speeds. If you
                     use a lower delay value, the LED flashes faster. Then you tell the Pi
                     which pin the LED is connected to, which is pin 18 ’üĄ.



                                    54 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
     You create a loop that repeats the instructions indented below it
forever unless you stop the program ’üČ. Finally, you add the instruc-
tions to the loop: turn the LED on ’üĘ, wait for 1 second ’üĖ, turn the
LED off, and wait for 1 second. The LED will flash forever.

Running Your Program
To run the program and make the LED flash, press F5 on your key┬Ł
board. You should be prompted to save the file. Name and save
your program: your LED mold should then come to life! To end the
program, close the Python window by clicking the X.

Modify: Fading the LED
You can modify your program so the LED fades in and out, also known
as pulsing, instead of flashing on and off. Open a new Python file and
add the code in Listing 3-2. This program gradually makes the LED
brighter, and then it fades out.

from gpiozero import PWMLED                                                  Listing 3-2
from signal import pause                                                     Fading the LED
led = PWMLED(18)
led.pulse()
pause()


     Here you import the PWMLED class to enable you to pulse the LED,
set the GPIO pin number youŌĆÖre using for the LED, and then set the
pulse. You also add a pause, which ensures that the program con-
tinuously runs and reduces the load on the CPU, making it run faster.
Normally, the program runs once and then the GPIO pins are reset.
The pause() instruction ensures that the signal to the GPIO program
is not stopped: the program continues to run so the LED flashes until
you exit the program.
     Save this code and run it to see the difference!


B U IL DIN G THE L E D N IGHT-┬ŁL I GHT
LetŌĆÖs level up the night-┬Łlight project. YouŌĆÖll add a photoresistor to
make a simple night-┬Łlight to add atmosphere to your room, as shown
in Figure 3-6. A photoresistor is a sensor that measures the amount
of light in the room and returns a value. This value can trigger the light
to turn on or off, depending on how dark it is.
      Light readings are analog, which means they can be any value,
not just on or off. Think of the sun rising or setting: it doesnŌĆÖt just
appear in the morning; instead, the light gradually increases.


                                             55 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
                          Com┬Łputers, on the other hand, are digital, meaning they understand
                          only on or off values. Computers use millions of tiny switches that
                          can be turned on or off (like a light switch).
                                However, if you have a dimmer switch, you can adjust the light to
                          different levels of brightness. YouŌĆÖll use a similar technique here.
                                When light hits the photoresistor, it creates a small electrical
                          charge. YouŌĆÖll store this charge in a capacitor, which is a small device
                          designed to store electrical charge. You can then use the amount
                          of charge stored in the capacitor to indicate how much light was
                          detected.
                                If the capacitor is fully charged, the reading will be a value of 1,
                          meaning the room is fully lit and you donŌĆÖt need the night-┬Łlight on. A
                          reading of 0.4 means that the room is lit about 40 percent and that
                          itŌĆÖs dark enough for your Pi to turn on the light.

      Figure 3-6
An Ironman night-┬Łlight




                          Wiring Your Night-┬ŁLight
                          You need to keep your LED light attached to GPIO pin 18. Figure 3-7
                          shows the wiring diagram for reference.
                              Follow these steps to wire the light:

                          1.   Add the new parts: Place the legs of the photoresistor into
                               your breadboard, leaving at least one line of space between the
                               legs. Add the capacitor to the breadboard, with one of the legs
                               in the same row as the right leg of the photoresistor, as shown in
                               Figure 3-7.




                                          56 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
                                                                                Figure 3-7
                                                                                Adding the capacitor and
                                                                                the photoresistor to the
                                                                                breadboard




   2.   Add the wires: Add wire 1 in line with the left leg of the photo-
        resistor. Add wire 2 in line with the right leg of the photoresistor
        and the left leg of the capacitor. Place wire 3 in line with the left
        leg of the capacitor. These wires are shown in Figure 3-7.
   3.   Connect to your Raspberry Pi: Connect wire 1 to the first
        physical pin, the 3V3 pin, which provides the power. Connect
        wire 2 to GPIO pin 4: this is the fourth physical pin on the left.
        Connect wire 3 to the ground pin, GND. I recommend you use
        the nearest ground pin, number 6.


   Coding the Night-┬ŁLight
   To code the night-┬Łlight, start a new Python file and then add the
   program in Listing 3-3.

’üĄ from gpiozero import LightSensor, LED                                         Listing 3-3
’üČ import time                                                                   Coding the night-┬Łlight
’üĘ ldr = LightSensor(4)
’üĖ led = LED(18)
’ü╣ while True:
     print (ldr.value)
     time.sleep(2)
   ’ü║ if ldr.value <= 0.4:
         print ("light on")
         led.on()
   ’ü╗ else:
         led.off()


        You import the LightSensor and LED classes from the gpiozero
   library to help you control the photoresistor and LED, respectively ’üĄ.
   Then you import the time module so you can add a short pause

                                                  57 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
between each light reading ’üČ. To begin with, youŌĆÖll set the value to 2.
This will enable you to test the program by placing your hand over
the photoresistor. When you use the program as a night-┬Łlight, you
can increase the time delay. Because a sunset can take several min-
utes, taking a reading every second would be pointless; reaching the
required light level could take 45 minutes, and your Pi would have to
take more than 2700 readings, using up processing time and power.
      At ’üĘ you tell the program that the photoresistor is attached to
GPIO 4. Then you tell the program that the LED is attached to GPIO
pin 18 ’üĖ.
      You create a while True loop to make the program continu-
ously take light readings and check the value so it doesnŌĆÖt miss the
sunset ’ü╣.You print the light reading value to the screen and add a
short pause of 2 seconds. You might be interested in the light value
readings, and seeing them onscreen will make it easier for you to test
if the program is working correctly.
      You then use a conditional to check whether the light reading is
less than or equal to the value 0.4 (remember that 0 is no light and 1
is full sunlight) ’ü║. A conditional is an instruction that tells the program
to run certain commands only if something is true. This if statement
tells the program that if the value is less than or equal to 0.4, itŌĆÖs get-
ting dark, so the program should print an optional warning message
and turn on the night-┬Łlight. You can adjust the light level to match
your environment. For example, if you live in a city, you might need to
set the value higher to account for streetlights.
      The else statement is another conditional that tells the computer
that if the reading is above 0.4, it should turn off the LED ’ü╗.

Running Your Program
To run the program and test your photoresistor, press F5 on your
keyboard. This will prompt you to save your file with a recognizable
name, and then it will run. Test your night-┬Łlight by placing a cloth or
your fingers over the sensor to block the light: this should trigger your
night-┬Łlight to turn on.
     You can adjust the sensitivity by reducing or increasing the value
on line 8 of the program. For example, try changing the line to the
following:

 if ldr.value <= 0.2:




                58 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
    This line will trigger the light only when itŌĆÖs very dark. To end the
program, close the Python window by clicking the X.
    The light in your room and the type of LED youŌĆÖre using will deter-
mine the best values for you to use. Experiment with photoresistor
values to find the one most appropriate for your environment.


WRAPPIN G U P
You now have a working, custom-┬Łbuilt night-┬Łlight. Here are a few
ideas for improving your light:
ŌĆó   Create more LED creatures and add them to your collection.
ŌĆó   Use different-┬Łcolored LEDs to make different-┬Łcolored lights.
ŌĆó   Add glitter to the glue before the glue sets to make it sparkle.
ŌĆó   Use a small coin-┬Łstyle battery to make the feature portable by
    placing the battery between the LED legs.
ŌĆó   Reverse the light value so the LED light is an alarm and flashes
    when the light value is above 0.80.




                                             59 ŌĆó CHAPTER 3
