Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb




                          BASH SCRIP TING
                                         8
                 Any self-respecting hacker must be able
                 to write scripts. For that matter, any self-
               respecting Linux administrator must be
            able to script. Hackers often need to automate
     commands, sometimes from multiple tools, and this
     is most efficiently done through short programs they
     write themselves.
         In this chapter, we build a few simple bash shell scripts to start you off
     with scripting. We’ll add capabilities and features as we progress, eventually
     building a script capable of finding potential attack targets over a range of
     IP addresses.
                 Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

                         To become an elite hacker, you also need the ability to script in one of
                     the widely used scripting languages, such as Ruby (Metasploit exploits are
                     written in Ruby), Python (many hacking tools are Python scripts), or Perl
                     (Perl is the best text-manipulation scripting language). I give a brief intro-
                     duction to Python scripting in Chapter 17.


     A Crash Course in Bash
                     A shell is an interface between the user and the operating system that enables
                     you to manipulate files and run commands, utilities, programs, and much
                     more. The advantage of a shell is that you perform these tasks immediately
                     from the computer and not through an abstraction, like a GUI, which allows
                     you to customize your task to your needs. As mentioned in Chapter 7, a num-
                     ber of different shells are available for Linux, including the Korn shell, the Z
                     shell, the C shell, and the Bourne-again shell, more widely known as bash.
                         In recent years, the developers of Kali Linux have changed from the
                     bash shell to the Z shell as the default shell. Although there is nothing
                     wrong with the Z shell (macOS has changed as well) since most Linux and
                     Unix distributions (Red Hat, Ubuntu, Solaris, and so on) still use the bash
                     shell, I think we should too. Luckily, the developers of Kali Linux have
                     made it easy to switch your default shell back to bash using the command
                     kali-tweaks.
                         Simply enter this command

                     kali> kali-tweaks

                     and it opens a graphical user interface like that shown in Figure 8-1.




                     Figure 8-1: The main Kali menu

                        Use your down arrow key to select the fourth option, Shell & Prompt,
                     and press enter. This will open the screen shown in Figure 8-2.




82   Chapter 8
Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb




     Figure 8-2: The Shell & Prompt setting

        Scroll down to the second option, Default Login Shell, and press
     enter. This will open the screen shown in Figure 8-3.




     Figure 8-3: Selecting the bash shell

         Use your spacebar to select Bash and then scroll down to Apply and
     press enter. You will then be prompted for your password, and when you
     enter it, your system will respond with the message shown in Figure 8-4.




     Figure 8-4: Kali lets you know that the login shell
     has changed.

          Now, press enter, log out and log back in, and your shell will be changed
     to the most common shell in the Linux/Unix world, bash!
          The bash shell can run any system commands, utilities, or applications
     your usual command line can run, but it also includes some of its own built-
     in commands. Table 8-1 later in the chapter provides a reference to some
     useful commands that reside within the bash shell.




                                                                             Bash Scripting   83
                 Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

                          In earlier chapters, you used the cd, pwd, set, and umask commands. In
                     this chapter, you will be using two more commands: the echo command,
                     used in Chapter 7, which displays messages to the screen, and the read com-
                     mand, which reads in data and stores it somewhere else. Just learning these
                     two commands alone will enable you to build a simple but powerful tool.
                          You’ll need a text editor to create shell scripts. A text editor is a pro-
                     gram that can edit plain, unformatted text, like Notepad in Windows or
                     TextEdit in macOS. You can use whichever Linux text editor you like best.
                     Popular hacker choices include vi, vim, emacs, gedit, kate, and so on. I’ll be
                     using mousepad in this book, as I have in previous chapters. Using a differ-
                     ent editor should not make any difference in your script or its functionality.


     Your First Script: “Hello, Hackers-Arise!”
                     For your first script, we will start with a simple program that returns a mes-
                     sage to the screen that says Hello, Hackers-Arise! Open your text editor, and
                     let’s go.
                          To start, you need to tell your operating system which interpreter you
                     want to use for the script. To do this, enter a shebang, which is a combina-
                     tion of a hash mark and an exclamation mark, like so:

                     #!

                          You then follow the shebang (#!) with /bin/bash to indicate that you
                     want the operating system to use the bash shell interpreter. As you’ll see
                     in later chapters, you could also use the shebang to use other interpreters,
                     such as Perl or Python. Here, you want to use the bash interpreter, so enter
                     the following:

                     #! /bin/bash

                          Next, enter the echo command, which tells the system to simply repeat
                     (or echo) back to your monitor whatever follows the command.
                          In this case, we want the system to echo back to us Hello, Hackers-Arise!,
                     as done in Listing 8-1. Note that the text or message we want to echo back
                     must be in double quotation marks.

                     #! /bin/bash

                     # This is my first bash script. Wish me luck.

                     echo ″Hello, Hackers-Arise!″

                     Listing 8-1: Your “Hello, Hackers-Arise!” script

                        Here, you also see a line that’s preceded by a hash mark (#). This is a
                     comment, which is a note you leave to yourself or anyone else reading the
                     code, to explain what you’re doing in the script. Programmers use com-
                     ments in every coding language. These comments are not read or executed


84   Chapter 8
Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

     by the interpreter, so you don’t need to worry about messing up your code.
     They are visible only to humans. The bash shell knows a line is a comment
     if it starts with the # character.
           Now, save this file as HelloHackersArise with no extension, and exit your
     text editor.

     Setting Execute Permissions
     By default, a newly created bash script is not executable even by you, the
     owner. Let’s look at the permissions on our new file in the command line
     by using cd to move into the directory and then entering ls -l. It should
     look something like this:

     kali> ls -l
     --snip--
     -rw-r--r-- 1 kali kali 90 Oct 22 14:32 HelloHackersArise
     --snip--

         As you can see, our new file has rw-r--r-- (644) permissions. As you
     learned in Chapter 5, this means the owner of this file has only read (r)
     and write (w) permissions, but no execute (x) permissions. The group
     and all other users have only read permissions. We need to give ourselves
     execute permissions in order to run this script. We change the permissions
     with the chmod command, as you saw in Chapter 5. To give the owner, the
     group, and all others execute permissions, enter the following:

     kali> sudo chmod 755 HelloHackersArise

         Now when we do a long listing on the file, like so, we can see that we
     have execute permissions:

     kali> ls -l
     --snip--
     -rwx r-x r-x 1 kali kali 42 Oct 22 14:32 HelloHackersArise
     --snip--

         The file will also be in green, another indicator of its execute permis-
     sions. The script is now ready to run!

     Running HelloHackersArise
     To run our simple script, enter the following:

     kali> ./HelloHackersArise

          The ./ before the filename tells the system that we want to execute
     this script in the file HelloHackersArise from the current directory. It also
     tells the system that if there is another file in another directory named
     HelloHackersArise, please ignore it and run HelloHackersArise only in the cur-
     rent directory. It may seem unlikely that there’s another file with this name


                                                                             Bash Scripting   85
                 Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

                     on your system, but it’s good practice to use the ./ when executing files, as
                     this localizes the file execution to the current directory, and many directo-
                     ries will have duplicate filenames, such as start and setup.
                          When we press enter, our very simple script returns our message to
                     the monitor:

                     Hello, Hackers-Arise!

                          Success! You just completed your first shell script!

                     Adding Functionality with Variables and User Input
                     So, now we have a simple script. All it does is echo back a message to stan-
                     dard output. If we want to create more advanced scripts, we will likely need
                     to add some variables.
                          A variable is an area of storage that can hold something in memory.
                     That “something” might be some letters or words (strings) or numbers. It’s
                     known as a variable because the values held within it are changeable; this
                     is an extremely useful feature for adding functionality to a script.
                          In our next script, we will add functionality to prompt the user for their
                     name, place whatever they input into a variable, then prompt the user for
                     the chapter they’re at in this book, and place that keyboard input into a
                     variable. After that, we’ll echo a welcome message that includes their name
                     and the chapter back to the user.
                          Open a new file in your text editor and enter the script shown in
                     Listing 8-2.

                  1 #! /bin/bash

                  2 # This is your second bash script. In this one, you prompt
                    # the user for input, place the input in a variable, and
                    # display the variable contents in a string.

                  3 echo ″What is your name?″

                     read name

                  4 echo ″What chapter are you on in Linux Basics for Hackers?″

                     read chapter

                  5 echo ″Welcome $name to Chapter $chapter of Linux Basics for Hackers!″

                     Listing 8-2: A simple script making use of variables

                         We open with #! /bin/bash to tell the system we want to use the bash
                     interpreter for this script 1. We then add a comment that describes the
                     script and its functionality 2. After that, we prompt the user for their name
                     and ask the interpreter to read the input and place it into a variable we call
                     name 3. Then we prompt the user to enter the chapter they are currently
                     working through in this book, and we again read the keyboard input into a
                     variable, this time called chapter 4.

86   Chapter 8
     Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

                In the final line, we construct a line of output that welcomes the reader
          by their name to the chapter they are on 5. We use the echo command and
          provide the text we want to display on the screen in double quotes. Then, to
          fill in the name and chapter number the user entered, we add the variables
          where they should appear in the message. As noted in Chapter 7, to use the
          values contained in the variables, you must precede the variable name with
          the $ symbol.
                Save this file as WelcomeScript.sh. The .sh extension is the convention for
          script files. You might have noticed we didn’t include the extension earlier;
          it’s not strictly required, and it makes no difference if you leave the exten-
          sion off. The extension can be a useful indicator for other people that this
          file is a shell script, though.
                Now, let’s run this script. Don’t forget to give yourself execute permis-
          sion with chmod first; otherwise, the operating system will scold you with a
          Permission denied message.

          kali> ./WelcomeScript.sh
          What is your name?
          OccupytheWeb
          What chapter are you on in Linux Basics for Hackers?
          8
          Welcome OccupytheWeb to Chapter 8 of Linux Basics for Hackers!

              As you can see, your script took input from the user, placed it into vari-
          ables, and then used those inputs to make a greeting for the user.
              This is a simple script, but it taught you how to use variables and take
          input from the keyboard. These are both crucial concepts in scripting that
          you will need to use in more complex scripts in future.


Your Very First Hacker Script: Scan for Open Ports
          Now that you have some basic scripting skills, let’s move to some slightly
          more advanced scripting that has real-world application to hacking. We’ll
          use an example from the world of black hat hacking. Black hat hackers are
          those with malicious intentions, such as stealing credit card numbers or
          defacing websites. White hat hackers are those with good intentions, such as
          helping software developers or system administrators make their systems
          more secure. Gray hat hackers are those who tend to move between these
          two extremes.
               Before you continue, you need to become familiar with a simple yet
          essential tool named nmap that comes installed on Kali by default. You’ve
          likely heard the name; nmap is used to probe a system to see whether it
          is connected to the network and finds out what ports are open. From the
          open ports discovered, you can surmise what services are running on the
          target system. This is a crucial skill for any hacker or system administrator.
               In its simplest form, the syntax for running an nmap scan looks like this:

          nmap<type of scan><target IP><optionally, target port>



                                                                                  Bash Scripting   87
                 Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

                         Not too difficult. The simplest and most reliable nmap scan is the TCP
                     connect scan, designated with the -sT switch in nmap. So, if you wanted to
                     scan IP address 192.168.181.1 with a TCP scan, you would enter the following:

                     nmap -sT 192.168.181.1

                         To take things a step further, if you wanted to perform a TCP scan of
                     address 192.168.181.1, looking to see whether port 3306 (the default port
                     for MySQL and MariaDB) was open, you could enter this:

                     nmap -sT 192.168.181.1 -p 3306

                         Here, -p designates the port you want to scan for. Go ahead and try it
                     out now on your Kali system.

                     Our Task
                     A hacker by the name of Max Butler, also known as Max Vision throughout
                     the hacker world, was released from US federal prison in 2021. Max was a
                     kind of gray hat hacker. By day, he was an IT security professional in Silicon
                     Valley, and by night, he was stealing and selling credit card numbers on
                     the black market. At one time, he ran the world’s largest credit card black
                     market, CardersMarket. Max served a 13-year prison term while at the
                     same time assisting the Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) in
                     Pittsburgh with defending against hackers.
                          A few years before Max was caught, he realized that the Aloha Point of
                     Sale (POS) system used by many small restaurants had a technical support
                     backdoor built into it. In this case, the backdoor enabled tech support to
                     assist their clients. Aloha tech support could access the end user’s system
                     through port 5505 to provide assistance when the user called for help. Max
                     realized that if he found a system connected to the internet with the Aloha
                     POS system, he could access the system with sysadmin (the all-powerful
                     system administrator) privileges through port 5505. Max was able to enter
                     many of these systems and steal tens of thousands of credit card numbers.
                          Eventually, Max wanted to find every system that had port 5505 open
                     so that he could go from stealing thousands of credit card numbers to
                     stealing millions. Max decided to write a script that would scan millions
                     of IP addresses looking for systems with port 5505 open. Of course, most
                     systems do not have port 5505 open, so if they did, it was likely they were
                     running the doomed Aloha POS. He could run this script while at work
                     during the day, then by night, hack into those systems identified as having
                     port 5505 open.
                          Our task is to write a script that will be nearly identical to Max’s script,
                     but rather than scan for port 5505 as Max did, our script will scan for sys-
                     tems connected to the ubiquitous online database MySQL or MariaDB.
                     MySQL and MariaDB are open source databases used behind millions of
                     websites; we’ll be working with MySQL in Chapter 12. By default, MySQL
                     uses port 3306. Databases are the “golden fleece” that nearly every black hat


88   Chapter 8
Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

     hacker is seeking, as they often contain credit card numbers and personally
     identifiable information (PII) that is very valuable on the black market.

     A Simple Scanner
     Before we write the script to scan public IPs across the internet, let’s take on
     a much smaller task. Instead of scanning the globe, let’s first write a script
     to scan for port 3306 on a local area network to see whether our script actu-
     ally works. If it does, we can easily edit it to do the much larger task.
          In your text editor, enter the script shown in Listing 8-3.

  1 #! /bin/bash

  2 # This script is designed to find hosts with MySQL installed

     nmap 3 -sT 192.168.181.0/24 -p 3306 >/dev/null -oG MySQLscan

  4 cat MySQLscan | grep open > MySQLscan2

     cat MySQLscan2

     Listing 8-3: The simplified scanner script

         We start with the shebang and the interpreter to use 1. Let’s follow this
     with a comment to explain what the script does 2.
         Now let’s use the nmap command to request a TCP scan 3 on our LAN,
     looking for port 3306. (Note that your IP addresses may differ; in your
     terminal, use the ifconfig command on Linux or the ipconfig command
     on Windows to determine your IP address.) The redirect symbol > tells the
     standard nmap output, which usually goes to the screen, to instead go to
     /dev/null, which is simply a place to send output so that it disappears. We’re
     doing this on a local machine, so it doesn’t matter so much, but if you were
     to use the script remotely, you’d want to hide the nmap output. We then
     send the output of the scan to a file named MySQLscan in a grep-able for-
     mat, meaning a format that grep can work on.
         The next line displays the MySQLscan file we stored the output in and
     then pipes that output to grep to filter for lines that include the keyword
     open 4. Then we put those lines into a file named MySQLscan2.
         Finally, you display the contents of the file MySQLscan2. This final file
     should only include lines of output from nmap with hosts that have port
     3306 open. Save this file as MySQLscanner.sh and give yourself execute per-
     missions with chmod 755.
         Execute the script, like so:

     kali> ./MySQLscanner.sh

     Host: 192.168.181.69 () Ports: 3306/open/tcp//mysql///

        As the output shows, this script was able to identify the only IP address
     on my LAN with MySQL or MariaDB running. Your results may differ,



                                                                             Bash Scripting   89
                 Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

                     depending on whether any ports are running MySQL installations on your
                     local network, of course.

                     An Improvement to the MySQL Scanner
                     Now we want to adapt this script to make it applicable to more than just
                     your own local network. This script would be much easier to use if it could
                     prompt the user for the range of IP addresses they wanted to scan and the
                     port to look for, and then use that input. Remember, you learned how to
                     prompt the user and put their keyboard input into a variable in “Adding
                     Functionality with Variables and User Input” on page 86.
                          Let’s take a look at how you could use variables to make this script more
                     flexible and efficient.

                     Adding Prompts and Variables to Our Hacker Script
                     In your text editor, enter the script shown in Listing 8-4.

                     #! /bin/bash

                  1 echo ″Enter the starting IP address : ″
                  2 read FirstIP

                  3 echo ″Enter the last octet of the last IP address : ″
                    read LastOctetIP

                  4 echo ″Enter the port number you want to scan for : ″
                    read port

                  5 nmap -sT $FirstIP-$LastOctetIP -p $port >/dev/null –oG MySQLscan

                  6 cat MySQLscan | grep open > MySQLscan2

                  7 cat MySQLscan2

                     Listing 8-4: Your advanced MySQL port scanner

                         The first thing we need to do is replace the specified subnet with an
                     IP address range. We’ll create a variable called FirstIP and a second vari-
                     able named LastOctetIP to create the range as well as a variable named
                     port for the port number (the last octet is the last group of digits after the
                     third period in the IP address. In the IP address 192.168.1.101, the last
                     octet is 101).

       NOTE          The name of the variable is irrelevant, but best practice is to use a variable name that
                     helps you remember what the variable holds.

                         We also need to prompt the user for these values. We can do this by
                     using the echo command that we used in Listing 8-1.
                         To get a value for the FirstIP variable, echo ″Enter the starting IP
                     address : ″ to the screen, asking the user for the first IP address they want



90   Chapter 8
Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

     to scan 1. Upon seeing this prompt on the screen, the user will enter the
     first IP address, so we need to capture that input from the user.
          We can do this with the read command followed by the name of the
     variable we want to store the input in 2. This command will put the IP
     address entered by the user into the variable FirstIP. Then we can use that
     value in FirstIP throughout our script.
          We’ll do the same for the LastOctetIP 3 and port 4 variables by
     prompting the user to enter the information and then using a read com-
     mand to capture it.
          Next, we need to edit the nmap command in our script to use the vari-
     ables we just created and filled. To use the value stored in the variable,
     we simply preface the variable name with $, as in $port, for example. So,
     we scan a range of IP addresses 5, starting with the first user-input IP
     through the second user-input IP, and look for the particular port input
     by the user. We’ve used the variables in place of the subnet to scan and the
     port to determine what to scan for. As before, we send the standard output
     to /dev/null. Then, we send the output in a grep-able format to a file we
     named MySQLscan.
          The next line remains the same as in our simple scanner: it outputs
     the contents of the MySQLscan file, pipes it to grep, where it is filtered for
     lines that include the keyword open, and then sends that output to a new file
     named MySQLscan2 6. Finally, we display the contents of the MySQLscan2
     file 7.
          If everything works as expected, this script will scan IP addresses from
     the first input address to the last input address, searching for the input port
     and then reporting back with just the IP addresses that have the designated
     port open. Save your script file as MySQLscannerAdvanced, remembering to
     give yourself execute permission.

     Running the Scanner
     Now we can run our simple scanner script with the variables that determine
     what IP address range and port to scan without having to edit the script
     every time we want to run a scan:

     kali> ./MySQLscannerAdvanced.sh
     Enter the starting IP address :
     192.168.181.0
     Enter the last octet of the last IP address :
     255
     Enter the port number you want to scan for :
     3306
     Host: 192.168.181.254 () Ports:3306/open/tcp//mysql//

          The script prompts the user for the first IP address, the last octet of the
     last IP address, and then the port to scan for. After collecting this informa-
     tion, the script performs the nmap scan and produces a report of all the IP
     addresses in the range that have the specified port open. As you can see,
     even the simplest of scripting can create a powerful tool. You’ll learn even
     more about scripting in Chapter 17.

                                                                             Bash Scripting   91
                 Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

     Common Built-in Bash Commands
                     As promised, Table 8-1 gives you a list of some useful commands built
                     into bash.

                     Table 8-1: Built-in Bash Commands
                      Command         Function
                      :               Returns 0 or true
                      .               Executes a shell script
                      [[              Performs a conditional test
                      bg              Puts a job in the background
                      break           Exits the current loop
                      cd              Changes directory
                      continue        Resumes the current loop
                      echo            Displays the command arguments
                      eval            Evaluates the following expression
                      exec            Executes the following command without creating
                                      a new process, replacing the current process
                      exit            Quits the shell
                      export          Makes a variable or function available to other
                                      programs that are executed from this shell
                      fg              Brings a job to the foreground
                      getopts         Parses arguments to the shell script
                      jobs            Lists background (bg) jobs
                      pwd             Displays the current directory
                      read            Reads a line from standard input
                      readonly        Declares a variable as read-only
                      set             Lists all variables
                      shift           Moves the script’s input parameters to the left,
                                      dropping the first parameter (useful for consuming
                                      all parameters one at a time)
                      test            Evaluates arguments
                      times           Prints the user and system times
                      trap            Traps a signal so the script can handle it
                                      (untrapped signals terminate the script)
                      type            Displays how each argument would be interpreted
                                      as a command
                      umask           Changes the default permissions for a new file
                      unset           Deletes values from a variable or function
                      wait            Waits for a background process to complete




92   Chapter 8
      Linux Basics for Hackers, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 4/3/25 by OccupyTheWeb

Summary
            Scripting is an essential skill for any hacker or system administrator. It
            enables you to automate tasks that would normally take hours of your time,
            and once the script is saved, it can be used over and over again. Bash script-
            ing is the most basic form of scripting, and you will advance to Python
            scripting with even more capabilities in Chapter 17.


Exercises

            1. 	Create your own greeting script similar to our HelloHackersArise script.
            2. 	Create a script similar toMySQLscanner.sh but design it to find systems
                with Microsoft’s SQL Server database at port 1433. Call it MSSQLscanner.
            3. 	Alter that MSSQLscanner script to prompt the user for a starting and
                ending IP address and the port to search for. Then filter out all the
                IP addresses where those ports are closed and display only those that
                are open.




                                                                                   Bash Scripting   93
