The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba




                                            4
                      N E T W O R K F I LT R AT I O N




                     We’ve explored many ways to analyze network
                     data by measuring geometric properties. In
                    this chapter, we’ll introduce network filtration
                 for weighted networks, which tracks geometric
        properties and network metrics over threshold values
        imposed on the network. Then we’ll examine how net-
        work data can be transformed into a higher-dimensional
        topological object called a simplicial complex, and we’ll
        explore higher-dimensional versions of the network met-
        rics we’ve previously considered. From there, we’ll return
        to graph comparisons using a tool from topology related
        to filtrations.
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


     Graph Filtration
                   In the previous chapters, we reviewed different network metrics, includ-
                   ing different measures of centrality, entropy, spectral radius, diameter, and
                   many others. There’s an interesting way to understand topological proper-
                   ties of weighted networks: graph filtration, a method of creating a series of
                   weighted networks by iteratively removing edges below a certain threshold
                   (for instance, all edges with weights lower than 0.2, 0.4, or 0.6). By creating a
                   series of thresholded graphs, it’s possible to identify persistent network met-
                   rics, or local and global network metrics that persist across a wide range of
                   filtration values. This gives us features that can be plotted or tracked across
                   filtrations. This is one of the core ideas of topological data analysis (TDA).
                        To explore this further, let’s say we’re examining longitudinal educa-
                   tional or risk behavior outcomes of adolescents based on adolescent friend-
                   ship or informal social ties within a community. Imagine we have weighted
                   social networks with high degree metrics for each vertex, where edges are
                   weighted by hours spent with friends over a normal week. The first group
                   of friends might spend a couple of hours together playing soccer on the
                   weekend. The second group might study together once or twice a week and
                   see each other in classes. The third group might play sports often, do home-
                   work together after dinner or in the mornings before school, and stay over
                   at each other’s homes often. As we filter hours spent together, the degree
                   metrics will drop for the first two groups of friends in a network. The last
                   group will retain a high degree metric over the filtration, as they spend
                   more time together. This persistence of degree will likely shed light on the
                   strength of whatever social ties we’re examining in our study.
                        Let’s examine how we can implement graph filtrations by decomposing
                   and exploring two small example social networks, Graph 1 and Graph 2.
                   First, we’ll load the two networks into R and explore the structures of the
                   full networks with the script in Listing 4-1.

                   #load both networks in R
                   mydata1<-as.matrix(read.csv("Graph1w.csv",header=F))
                   mydata2<-as.matrix(read.csv("Graph2w.csv",header=F))

                   #load igraph and convert to graph objects
                   library(igraph)
                   g1<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata1,mode="undirected",weighted=T)
                   g2<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata2,mode="undirected",weighted=T)

                   #plot the two graphs
                   plot(g1,edge.label=E(g1)$weight,main="Graph 1")
                   plot(g2,edge.label=E(g2)$weight,main="Graph 2")

                   Listing 4-1: A script that loads two different network structures for filtration

                       The script in Listing 4-1 should load two different networks, Graph 1
                   and Graph 2, which have different connectivity patterns but the same num-
                   ber of vertices. It should also plot both networks with edge weights given in
                   the plots. Let’s compare the networks, shown in Figure 4-1.


76   Chapter 4
           The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba




Figure 4-1: Plots of the two example networks

                        Figure 4-1 suggests that Graph 1 is a sparsely connected network with
                   mostly large edge weights (perhaps a sample of students in the same class
                   showing up for a service activity over the course of a weekend), whereas Graph 2
                   is a densely connected network with a mixture of different edge weights
                   (perhaps a friendship network within a sports team). We’d expect higher hub
                   scores and other centrality measures in Graph 2, but a filtration might change
                   those metrics more quickly than we’d expect them to change in Graph 1.
                        Let’s create filtrations of the networks; this will allow us to explore a
                   few centrality metrics on these networks. We can do this by adding the fol-
                   lowing code to the script in Listing 4-1:

                   #filter Graph 1
                   mydata1[mydata1<0.2]<-0
                   g12<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata1,mode="undirected",weighted=T)
                   mydata1[mydata1<0.4]<-0
                   g14<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata1,mode="undirected",weighted=T)
                   mydata1[mydata1<0.6]<-0
                   g16<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata1,mode="undirected",weighted=T)
                   mydata1[mydata1<0.8]<-0
                   g18<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata1,mode="undirected",weighted=T)

                   #filter Graph 2
                   mydata2[mydata2<0.2]<-0
                   g22<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata2,mode="undirected",weighted=T)
                   mydata2[mydata2<0.4]<-0
                   g24<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata2,mode="undirected",weighted=T)
                   mydata2[mydata2<0.6]<-0
                   g26<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata2,mode="undirected",weighted=T)
                   mydata2[mydata2<0.8]<-0
                   g28<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(mydata2,mode="undirected",weighted=T)


                                                                                         Network Filtration   77
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                        The previous code filters Graph 1 and Graph 2 by edge weight, using
                   increasing intervals of 0.2. This yields a series of five networks in each
                   graph filtration, which can be further examined by applying network met-
                   rics to each sequence of filtered graphs.
                        Let’s examine the degree centrality of each vertex across the filtration
                   of Graph 1 by adding the following to our script:

                   #calculate degree centrality for Graph 1's filtration sequence
                   d1<-degree(g1)
                   d12<-degree(g12)
                   d14<-degree(g14)
                   d16<-degree(g16)
                   d18<-degree(g18)

                   #create a dataset tracking degree centrality across the filtration
                   g1deg<-cbind(d1,d12,d14,d16,d18)

                       This code calculates degree centrality across filtrations of Graph 1,
                   which should yield a dataset containing the information in Table 4-1.

                   Table 4-1: Degree Centrality Across Graph 1 Filtrations
                    Column1       d1       d12     d14      d16     d18
                    V1            3        2       2        1       0
                    V2            2        1       1        1       1
                    V3            3        3       3        2       1
                    V4            3        3       3        1       1
                    V5            2        2       2        2       1
                    V6            1        1       1        1       0

                        Table 4-1 shows that vertices 1, 3, and 4 have high degree centralities;
                   however, vertices 3 and 4 retain these high degree centrality values across
                   much more of the filtration than vertex 1, suggesting they are more important
                   to the network, despite having the same centrality metric on the unfiltered
                   network (column 1).
                        Now, let’s add some code to calculate degree centrality across Graph 2’s
                   filtration:

                   #calculate degree centrality for Graph 2's filtration sequence
                   d2<-degree(g2)
                   d22<-degree(g22)
                   d24<-degree(g24)
                   d26<-degree(g26)
                   d28<-degree(g28)

                   #create a dataset tracking degree centrality across the filtration
                   g2deg<-cbind(d2,d22,d24,d26,d28)

                        This code calculates degree centrality across the filtration of Graph 2,
                   yielding a table similar to that obtained by Graph 1’s filtration and

78   Chapter 4
The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


        centrality calculation. Table 4-2 summarizes the findings from the Graph 2
        filtration and centrality calculation.

        Table 4-2: Degree Centrality Across Graph 2 Filtrations
         Column1       d2       d22     d24      d26     d28
         V1            4        3       3        3       3
         V2            4        4       3        2       1
         V3            4        4       3        2       1
         V4            5        4       3        0       0
         V5            3        3       1        1       0
         V6            4        4       3        2       1


             As Table 4-2 shows, there are relatively high degree centrality measures
        in the unfiltered Graph 2; however, the pattern changes by vertex after the
        filtration begins. Some vertices, like vertex 1, retain a high degree central-
        ity throughout the filtration. Others, such as vertex 4, retain a high degree
        centrality and then drop to 0. Others still, like vertex 6, show a slow degra-
        dation of degree centrality over the full filtration. This may be informative
        in a study of social ties within a subgroup of interest. A high degree of infor-
        mal social ties, represented by a high centrality degree, has been linked to
        positive educational attainment, career achievement, and resilience to life
        adversity in young adults.
             Degree centrality is only one example of metrics that we can calculate
        across a filtration; we can also calculate other local metrics such as between-
        ness centrality or triadic closure. In addition, we can calculate global metrics,
        such as the spectral radius or the Euler characteristic, across a filtration. Let’s
        add the following to Listing 4-1 to calculate the diameter of each filtration of
        Graph 1:

        #calculate graph diameter of Graph 1's filtration
        di1<-diameter(g1)
        di12<-diameter(g12)
        di14<-diameter(g14)
        di16<-diameter(g16)
        di18<-diameter(g18)

            The sequence of diameters calculated across the filtration of Graph 1
        by this code is 2.1, 2.9, 2.9, 1.6, and 0.9. Let’s calculate the diameters for
        Graph 2’s filtration:

        #calculate graph diameter of Graph 2's filtration
        di2<-diameter(g2)
        di22<-diameter(g22)
        di24<-diameter(g24)
        di26<-diameter(g26)
        di28<-diameter(g28)



                                                                              Network Filtration   79
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                        The sequence of diameters calculated across the filtration of Graph 2
                   by this code is 0.9, 1.2, 1.6, 2.4, and 1.7. This is different than Graph 1’s
                   diameter sequence, suggesting that the diameter is generally smaller until
                   later in the filtration sequence. This metric’s filtration might be useful in
                   assessing a community’s overall level and depth of informal social ties, a
                   measure of community resources available to residents in need. Figure 4-2
                   shows the diameter plots across both filtrations to compare the two
                   networks.

                                    Graphic Diameter Metric Across Filtrations of Graph 1 and Graph 2
                              3.5
                               3
                              2.5
                   Diameter




                                2
                              1.5
                               1
                              0.5
                               0
                                      0              0.2               0.4            0.6               0.8
                                                             Filtration value
                                                  Graph 1             Graph 2


                   Figure 4-2: A plot of graph diameter metrics across filtrations of Graph 1 and Graph 2

                        As we can see in Figure 4-2, Graph 1 has a larger graph diameter than
                   Graph 2 early in the filtration, but this relationship switches after a filtra-
                   tion value of 0.4. This suggests that there is greater eccentricity in Graph 1
                   early in the filtrations but greater eccentricity in Graph 2 later in the filtra-
                   tion. Remember that eccentricity is the maximum distance from one point
                   to another in the network.
                        Graph filtration tracking as we’ve plotted in Figure 4-2 can be help-
                   ful in distinguishing similar graphs with different connectivity patterns or
                   weights. Dynamic networks, in which weights can change over time, could
                   be a use case of graph filtrations. In addition, they are quite useful in com-
                   parison among networks with the same vertices but potentially different
                   weights (such as patient groups in brain imaging studies); in fact, brain
                   imaging studies are one of the applications for which graph filtration was
                   developed. Higher eccentricity values suggest longer pathways to relay neu-
                   ral signals; stronger edge weights represent stronger connections between
                   two areas of the brain. Strong edges with low eccentricity suggest a func-
                   tional module activated in a particular task given to the patient groups on
                   which imaging was performed.
                        Although graph filtration is a relatively new concept, it has mainly been
                   confined to biological network data, including networks based on brain
                   imaging studies. However, the graph filtration method is widely applicable
                   to weighted network data, and its tool set lends itself to further development




80   Chapter 4
   The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


           in other fields. If you want to explore this topic in more depth, look through
           the references at the end of this book and play around with graph filtrations
           on their own data. For now, let’s turn our attention to a topological view of
           graphs, which allows us to extend the relationships captured in graphs to
           other types of interactions between people or things.


From Graphs to Simplicial Complexes
           Graphs can be considered topological objects that have defined global
           properties we can leverage in our analyses, and it’s possible to turn a graph
           into a higher-dimensional version of a graph, called a simplicial complex,
           by considering three-way, four-way, and n-way interactions by individuals
           and vertices in the graph. Let’s consider three colleagues who often col-
           laborate on academic papers but have never published with all three names
           on a paper. We’ll create a simple graph for the three colleagues, shown in
           Figure 4-3.




                         Sadako




             Pedro                     Amara

           Figure 4-3: A simplicial complex showing
           two-way interactions among three colleagues

               Now let’s imagine a paper where all three colleagues participate and
           have their names on the paper. This is a three-way interaction, rather than
           three two-way interactions, and we’d end up with a filled-in triangle rather
           than three sets of two-way arrows, as shown in Figure 4-4.




                         Sadako




             Pedro                    Amara

           Figure 4-4: A simplicial complex showing
           three-way interactions among three colleagues




                                                                                 Network Filtration   81
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                        Figure 4-4 uses a triangle to represent a three-way connection among
                   colleagues, similar to how the arrows between two colleagues represented
                   two-way connections. This can be generalized to tetrahedra for four-way
                   interactions and more exotic shapes to represent higher n-way interactions.
                   There’s no limit as to how high of a number n can be, but computational
                   issues will come into play at some point as we work our way up to n-way
                   interactions in a simplicial complex. Analyses involving email chains,
                   co-authors on papers, or conference calls are common applications that
                   extend social network analysis and graphs into the analysis of simplicial
                   complexes. Depending on the size of the network and the size of the n-way
                   interactions, simplicial complex representations of individuals and mutual
                   interactions can become very complicated across values of n. Analyzing
                   these structures can involve a lot of computing power and tools that extend
                   network metrics. However, because graphs are topological objects, many
                   theorems and tools of topology can be successfully applied to them without
                   transformations or other hassles. This, in turn, allows for other areas of
                   math, including partial differential equations and probability theory, to be
                   applied and developed on graphs.
                        Just as we could filter a weighted graph, we also can filter simplicial
                   complexes. The filtration process for simplicial complexes varies depend-
                   ing on how the simplicial complex is built. In most topological data analysis
                   algorithms, we start with a point cloud of data within a space where a dis-
                   tance metric can be defined. Points are included in a simplicial complex
                   if they share either mutual n-way overlapping sets with each other (Čech
                   complex) or pairwise overlapping sets (Vietoris–Rips complex). By sequentially
                   increasing or decreasing the value of the distance metric, we obtain a filtra-
                   tion of simplicial complexes. In practice, the Vietoris–Rips complex is easier
                   to compute and underlies many common topological data analysis pack-
                   ages. This leads us to a very new and emerging part of network analytics:
                   extensions of network tools to simplicial complexes.
                        Many of the tools introduced in the previous chapters have simplicial
                   complex analogs, including eccentricity, shortest path algorithms, central-
                   ity metrics (Katz centrality, eigenvector centrality, closeness centrality, and
                   so on), triadic closure, and many more. Typically, simplicial complexes of
                   network data are built by computing maximal cliques within the network
                   (though it’s possible to define a distance metric and apply the process
                   defined in the prior paragraph to build simplicial complexes from network
                   data as well). Maximal cliques of a network include the highest n-way mutual
                   edges among groups of vertices. These maximal cliques correspond to an
                   (n – 1)-simplicial complex. The flag complex of the graph involves building
                   the graph’s simplicial complex by computing the graph’s maximal cliques.
                   From this complex, it’s possible to define quantities at each simplicial com-
                   plex level, which can be combined into a total metric across levels. This
                   means we can glean more information about the overall structure of the
                   network and its components at various levels of a simplicial complex.
                        Let’s return to Farrelly’s social network introduced in prior chapters
                   and look at an extension of degree centrality, dubbed topological dimension.
                   We can define topological dimension as a weighted degree centrality,

82   Chapter 4
The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


        weighting each vertex by the dimension of the cliques in which it resides,
        which involves summing across a vertex’s cliques of different dimensions.
        For instance, a vertex in a maximal two-clique and a maximal three-clique
        within the network would have a topological dimension of 5. A vertex in
        a maximal five-clique and no other cliques would also have a topological
        dimension of 5. However, the former vertex might have a degree of 3, con-
        necting to one other vertex in the two-clique and two other vertices in the
        three-clique; the latter would have a degree of 4, connecting to the four
        other vertices in the five-clique.
            In Listing 4-2, we have a script that calculates the maximal cliques and
        the topological dimension of vertices within Farrelly’s social network.
        #load the author's network
        g_social<-read.csv("SocialNetwork.csv")

        #create the graph
        library(igraph)
        g1<-graph_from_adjacency_matrix(g_social,mode="undirected",weighted=F)

        #compute the maximal cliques in the author's network data
        cl<-maximal.cliques(g1)

        #create array
        cl<-as.array(cl)

        #get clique size from maximal clique array
        d<-dim(cl)
        l<-rep(NA,d)
        for (i in 1:d){
          l[i]<-length(as.vector(cl[[i]]))
        }

        #create matrix of vertices in maximal cliques
        av<-matrix(rep(NA,d*20),20)
        for (i in 1:20){
          for (j in 1:d){
            av[i,j]<-i%in%cl[[j]]
          }
        }

        #convert to binary indicators
        avind<-ifelse(av==TRUE,1,0)

        #multiply out to calculate each vertex's topological dimension
        topmat<-t(avind)*l
        topdim<-colSums(topmat)

        Listing 4-2: A script that calculates topological dimension across vertices in Farrelly’s
        social network

            This script results in a topological dimension calculation based on the
        flag complex of the graph. It first calculates the flag complex from the
        maximal cliques; it then stores the information of each clique, such that
        we can cycle through each clique to see which vertices belong to each

                                                                                   Network Filtration   83
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                   clique. Converting this information to a binary indicator matrix allows us
                   to multiply the dimension of the clique and the indicator matrix, resulting
                   in a vector containing the topological dimension of each vertex. Table 4-3
                   shows the topological dimension and degree of each vertex in the author’s
                   network dataset.

                   Table 4-3: Topological Dimension and Degree
                   Summary for Vertices in Farrelly’s Social Network
                    Vertex     Degree     Topological dimension
                    1          2          3
                    2          1          2
                    3          5          11
                    4          2          3
                    5          4          7
                    6          3          6
                    7          8          18
                    8          3          4
                    9          3          4
                    10         3          6
                    11         3          5
                    12         1          2
                    13         4          8
                    14         4          7
                    15         4          8
                    16         2          4
                    17         2          4
                    18         3          6
                    19         2          4
                    20         1          2


                        Table 4-3 shows a distinct difference between degree, which includes
                   only the vertices and edges of the author’s network in its calculation, and
                   the topological dimension, which includes higher-order interactions. For
                   instance, vertices 9 and 10 both have a degree of 3; however, their topologi-
                   cal dimensions differ, with vertex 9 having a score of 4 and vertex 10
                   having a score of 6. The importance of vertex 10 to the overall network struc-
                   ture is larger than the importance of vertex 9 to the overall network structure.
                   Without considering higher-order interactions within the network, we
                   would not be able to distinguish between the two vertices with respect to
                   this metric.
                        For weighted networks, it’s possible to combine these simplicial-complex-
                   based metrics with graph filtration, yielding a sequence of metrics over the

84   Chapter 4
   The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


           filtration based on the simplicial complex of the network. You’ll see this
           when we discuss a tool called persistent homology in the next section of this
           chapter. You could do the same with the Euler characteristic or the topo-
           logical dimension or a yet-to-be-developed simplicial complex extension of
           network metrics.
                Simplicial complex extensions of network metrics are a very new area
           of study within network science, and few packages or open source functions
           exist to calculate the simplicial analogs of network metrics. However, it is
           hoped that this example and some of the papers on this topic will spark the
           addition of simplex-based metric within network science packages. Perhaps
           you will take up the challenge and contribute functions to the igraph pack-
           age or other open source network science tools.
                The next tools we look at will involve a bit more topology than we’ve
           encountered so far, so first let’s explore another topological concept that’s
           useful in graph analytics and in understanding simplicial complexes.


Introduction to Homology
           The basic topological premise of our next set of tools involves counting
           different dimensions of holes in an object or dataset. Consider a piece of
           paper with a hole in the middle of it or a basketball with a sphere of air
           inside it. These are holes of different dimensions, and each hole separates
           connected pieces of an object from other pieces of itself. When these holes
           exist in manifolds or functions, we can systematically study them and clas-
           sify objects or spaces based on the number and dimension of these holes.
                Homology is the counting of varying-dimensional holes (connected
           components, circles, spheres, voids, and so on) within a given object or
           space, usually to classify that object or space. For low-dimensional spaces,
           this is fairly straightforward; you can actually build a physical model of the
           space and count the holes. However, there are also variants of homology
           that allow topologists to distinguish between different types of objects and
           spaces that may be higher dimensional or strangely shaped without requir-
           ing a physical model.
                Numbers corresponding to holes in each dimension create a handy col-
           lection of values, called Betti numbers, that organize the number and type
           of hole within a given object or space such that each object can be classi-
           fied and studied alongside other objects whose numbers match. If you’re
           familiar with algebraic topology, this is a standard procedure for the clas-
           sification of abstract mathematical structures. Commonly, these numbers
           are stored in a vector. It’s a bit abstract, but we’ll go through some simple
           examples.

           Examples of Betti Numbers
           Many sports involve using a ball, but not all balls are the same, topo-
           logically speaking. Basketballs and baseballs are both round balls in



                                                                                 Network Filtration   85
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                   three-dimensional space. Basketballs are usually bigger than baseballs, but
                   if there were a child’s toy basketball of the same size as a baseball, one might
                   look at them and think they are quite similar.




                   Figure 4-5: An example baseball and basketball,
                   which look similar but are topologically distinct

                        Topologically, though, they are quite distinct. These two balls differ in
                   second Betti numbers, which count three-dimensional voids in an object. A
                   vector of Betti numbers is an infinite sequence of numbers representing the
                   number of holes in each dimension, starting with connected components on
                   the zeroth number position and moving to circles (first number position),
                   voids (second number position), and higher-dimensional voids (starting
                   from the third position and going to infinite position). In practice, most
                   datasets don’t have many holes past the first Betti number, so we can fill the
                   rest of the vector with zeros. The hollow basketball has a hole past the first
                   Betti number because it contains a void, giving a vector of Betti numbers
                   (1, 0, 1, 0, . . .), while the solid baseball has no holes of any dimension, corre-
                   sponding to a Betti number vector of (1, 0, 0, 0, . . .).
                        Some objects have more than one hole in a given dimension. For instance,
                   imagine gluing a second basketball to the outer surface of the basketball in
                   Figure 4-5. This object would obviously have another void, yielding a Betti num-
                   ber vector of (1, 0, 2, 0, . . .). A donut, or torus, has a vector of (1, 2, 1, 0, . . .),
                   as it has two open circles defining the ends of the tube, which form a void
                   when connected at the ends. Figure 4-6 shows the classical construction of a
                   torus from a sheet of paper.




                   Figure 4-6: The construction of a torus from a sheet of paper
                   connected at the edges

                       It’s fairly easy to classify objects and spaces that can be easily visualized
                   in three dimensions. However, many datasets used in the industry involve
                   more than three dimensions, and comparisons and classifications of these
                   objects require algorithms that can discern the Betti numbers associated
                   with those objects; among these are genomics datasets (which can involve
                   million-dimensional spaces), video sequences, and multivariate time series.




86   Chapter 4
The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


        The Euler Characteristic
        One of the topology-based metrics shows up both in the analysis of net-
        works and in their higher-dimensional simplicial complex cousins, and it
        ties back to the notion of curvature introduced in prior chapters. The Euler
        characteristic, often given the notation of χ, provides a single number to sum-
        marize a topological space and is a topological invariant, meaning that the
        topological quantity being calculated does not change as the space is con-
        tinuously deformed (stretched, twisted, or otherwise manipulated without
        tearing the space). The Euler characteristic can be defined using Betti num-
        bers; technically, computing the Euler characteristic this way involves an
        alternating sum of Betti numbers (zeroth Betti number – first Betti number
        + second Betti number – third Betti number + fourth Betti number . . . up
        until the highest Betti number that exists).
             The Euler characteristic can also be defined through the dimensions of
        the simplicial complex (number of vertices – number of edges + number
        of triangles – number of mutual 4-way interactions + . . .). However, vertices
        included in an edge aren’t counted in the number of vertices. A triangle
        that makes up part of a mutual four-way interaction won’t be counted
        either.
             However, there is an easy way to obtain the largest pieces of a network
        or its higher-dimensional simplicial complex using an igraph function
        related to maximal cliques (as mentioned earlier). Maximal k – cliques
        denote and count the k – 1 simplices of the full simplicial complex derived
        from the network. They’re a convenient way to build the full simplicial com-
        plex and keep track of the pieces involved at each n-way interaction. Let’s
        add to the script in Listing 4-2 to count the maximal cliques in the author’s
        network:

        #create a table counting the number of k+1 simplices in the simplicial complex
        summ<-as.numeric(summary(cl)[,1])
        jjj<-table(summ)

            This code creates a table summarizing the maximal cliques in the net-
        work that we previously computed. The result should yield 11 two-cliques
        (one-simplices, or edges), 6 three-cliques (two-simplices, or triangles), and 1
        four-clique (three-simplices, or a mutual four-way interaction). We can plug
        these values into the Euler characteristic formula:

                     χ = 0 vertices – 11 edges + 6 triangles – 1 tetrahedron

            This gives a χ of –6. Recent studies have shown that most real-world
        networks have negative Euler characteristics. There’s a very interesting
        reason that network data tends toward negative Euler characteristics
        related to the curvature of the network. Negative curvature in graphs is
        associated with the robustness of the network; biological networks with
        highly negative curvature can often withstand loss of function within




                                                                              Network Filtration   87
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                   parts of the network without adverse effects on the organism. The Gauss–
                   Bonnet theorem relates the Euler characteristic, defined through homology,
                   and the curvature of the object, including the manifold’s curvature and
                   the curvature of the manifold’s boundary. There have been some recent
                   attempts to link network analytics tools such as homology and Forman–
                   Ricci curvature for a deeper study into network properties. This is a deep
                   result in a branch of mathematics called differential geometry that connects
                   an object’s local geometry to its global topology, and it’s a newer area of
                   study in network science. Now that we know network topology and geome-
                   try are related to each other, let’s look at a topological tool called persistent
                   homology.

                   Persistent Homology
                   One of the most common topology-based algorithms used in data analy-
                   sis today is persistent homology, which has been applied in genomics,
                   healthcare, economics, energy, psychometrics, and many other fields. In
                   essence, the idea of the persistent homology algorithm is to build a point
                   cloud from the data, filter it into a series of simplicial complexes based
                   on different thresholds of the data (akin to an MRI), and track topologi-
                   cal features, such as holes or voids, appearing and disappearing in each
                   slice. For instance, consider the three slices of cheese in Figure 4-7, each
                   containing holes in the shape of circles; these circles affect the first Betti
                   numbers of the datasets.




                   Figure 4-7: Three slices of a cheese
                   block containing holes in different
                   places

                       In Figure 4-7 one hole appears in all three slices, another appears in
                   only the middle slice, and one appears in two slices. Holes and voids can be
                   of different sizes in real data, and as we move across slices, holes might grow
                   or shrink in diameter. Persistent homology algorithms have thresholds for
                   both the lifetime of a feature and the minimum size considered for measur-
                   ing a hole. In our example, we have features that are likely noise (either too
                   small a radius or only appearing in one slice of our cheese) and features
                   that are likely real features in the dataset (such as the void appearing in all
                   three slices). Let’s unpack this intuition.
                       Say we want to compare two datasets to see whether they are collected
                   from the same distribution or shape. This is common when matching image




88   Chapter 4
The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


        data. While image data rarely comes with cheese holes, circles come up in
        image data quite frequently in the form of eyes.
             Technically speaking, by varying the distances used to build the sim-
        plicial complex from the point cloud data (or filtering), you can track vari-
        ous Betti numbers through the filtration and assign each hole in the data
        an importance score, with important features lasting over longer filtration
        distances (longer persistence, in the parlance of persistent homology). In
        Figure 4-7, the hole that appears in all three slices would be considered the
        most important feature, and the hole that appears in only the second slice
        might be a result of noise in the data. These features can then be plotted
        on a barcode or persistence diagram that tracks these features’ lifetimes (dis-
        tance scale over which they exist in the filtration). We’ll explore barcodes
        and persistence diagrams in the following example analysis.
             In practice, datasets are usually examined only for low-dimensional
        holes and features due to computational issues, and the zeroth (connected
        components) and first (circles) Betti numbers are used most commonly
        unless you are explicitly computing high-dimensional shape data. The
        example in Figure 4-7 is connected in all three slices, so it has a zeroth
        Betti number of 1 across all slices. However, circles appear and disappear
        through the filtration, giving a barcode that looks like Figure 4-8.




        1           2            3

        Figure 4-8: A diagram plotting
        the persistence of features (holes)
        captured in the box of Figure 4-7

              The barcode shows the time at which features appear and disappear.
        For instance, in Figure 4-8, we can see a feature that appears at time 2 and
        disappears at time 3 (our bottom cheese hole in Figure 4-7). The sequence
        of connected components across the data slices has a curious relationship
        with another machine learning method, single-linkage hierarchical clus-
        tering, in which clusters at each height level correspond to the connected
        components at that particular slice. When both techniques use the same
        distance metric, the results are actually identical; however, the persistent
        homology approach will give more information than single-linkage hier-
        archical clustering’s dendrogram regarding the structure of the data. This
        means that machine learning practitioners can choose the technique that
        fits the problem best, as these two options come with their own plots and
        statistical tests. For instance, with a nontechnical audience, single-linkage
        hierarchical clustering might be preferable, as dendrograms and heatmaps
        are more familiar to biologists or social scientists.



                                                                              Network Filtration   89
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


     Comparison of Networks with Persistent Homology
                   Within the realm of network analytics, persistent homology can be a use-
                   ful way to compare network structures to see if different networks have the
                   same underlying geometry. Let’s explore this further with an application
                   to simulated networks. In neuroscience, it’s common to translate fMRI or
                   PET data into a network structure, where different regions of the brain are
                   translated to vertices and connected to other regions of the brain based
                   on activity patterns (sequential activation of an area, for instance, or co-
                   activation of multiple regions during one task). Often, outcomes of inter-
                   est involve comparing groups of patients, either healthy patients against a
                   group of patients with a particular neurological or psychological disorder
                   or two disease groups, to understand differences in the brain activation
                   patterns across disorders.
                        We’ll explore the use of persistent homology in the comparison of two
                   such networks. Because fMRI data isn’t readily available as open source,
                   we’ll simulate networks in igraph that are approximately the size of brain
                   imaging networks; this will demonstrate how this methodology would be
                   applied to imaging data that has been transformed to network data.
                        The igraph package allows you to simulate many types of network
                   data, including Erdös–Renyi graphs, scale-free graphs, and Watts–Strogatz
                   graphs. We’ll create each of these types of graphs using the script in
                   Listing 4-3.

                   #simulate three graphs using the igraph package for further comparison
                   library(igraph)

                   #create an Erdos-Renyi graph
                   g1<-erdos.renyi.game(30,0.3)

                   #create a scale-free graph
                   g2<-sample_pa(30,power=2.5,directed=F)

                   #create a Watts-Strogatz graph
                   g3<-sample_smallworld(2,5,3,0.3)

                   #plot the three graphs created
                   plot(g1,main="Erdos-Renyi Graph")
                   plot(g2,main="Scale-Free Graph")
                   plot(g3,main="Watts-Strogatz Graph")

                   Listing 4-3: A script that simulates three different types of network structures for statistical
                   comparison

                       Listing 4-3 creates three different types of networks that can later
                   be compared via persistent homology; it also visualizes the networks,
                   which should yield something similar (but probably not identical) to
                   Figure 4-9.




90   Chapter 4
           The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba




Figure 4-9: Plots of the three simulated network types

                         Figure 4-9 shows very different types of graphs. The scale-free graph
                    in the middle includes a hub with many vertices connected to the hub but
                    not to other vertices. The Erdös–Renyi graph on the left and the Watts–
                    Strogatz graph on the right have many more interconnections, but the
                    Watts–Strogatz model seems to have more structure connecting vertices
                    into cliques, rather than randomly connecting vertices.
                         Let’s apply persistent homology to these networks and compare the dis-
                    tance between persistence diagrams among these networks by adding the
                    following to Listing 4-3; again, your results may vary given the simulation of
                    each network type:

                    #load TDA package
                    library(TDAstats)

                    #get adjacency matrices
                    m1<-as.matrix(get.adjacency(g1))
                    m2<-as.matrix(get.adjacency(g2))
                    m3<-as.matrix(get.adjacency(g3))

                    #compute persistent homology
                    d1<-calculate_homology(m1,dim=2,format="cloud")
                    d2<-calculate_homology(m2,dim=2,format="cloud")
                    d3<-calculate_homology(m3,dim=2,format="cloud")

                    #plot persistence diagrams
                    plot_persist(d1)
                    plot_persist(d2)
                    plot_persist(d3)

                    #compute distances among graphs
                    w1<-phom.dist(d1,d2,limit.num=0)
                    w2<-phom.dist(d1,d3,limit.num=0)
                    w3<-phom.dist(d2,d3,limit.num=0)




                                                                                         Network Filtration   91
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                       This addition derives an adjacency matrix from each of the simulated
                   graphs and computes a persistence diagram from this adjacency matrix,
                   which is then compared through the distances between the zeroth homol-
                   ogy groups. This script should produce three persistence diagrams that
                   look like Figure 4-10 (note they won’t be identical, as each run will produce
                   something slightly different).




                   Figure 4-10: Persistence diagram plot for the three
                   simulated network types (from top to bottom:
                   Erdös–Renyi, scale-free, and Watts–Strogatz)

                       Figure 4-10 shows varying topological features found in each of the
                   network types. The Watts–Strogatz network and Erdös–Renyi graphs both
                   produce many large zeroth homology features (the dots), while the scale-free

92   Chapter 4
The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


        graph has a variety of zeroth homology feature sizes. The scale-free graph
        does not have higher-order homology features, while the other two graphs
        have first homology features (the triangles), albeit very near the diagonal line
        (suggesting that they may be noise). A point directly on the diagonal line is a
        feature that is in only one slice of the data; the farther from the diagonal
        line a point lies, the longer it has existed in the data. With respect to our
        three simulated networks, it’s hard to tell if the scale-free and Watts–Strogatz
        graphs differ significantly from the Erdös–Renyi graph just by looking at the
        persistence diagrams.
             We can add to our script to derive a null distribution for the Erdös–Renyi
        persistence diagram and use a special distance metric, Wasserstein distance,
        to statistically test the structural differences between the Erdös–Renyi
        persistence diagram and the scale-free and Watts–Strogatz persistence
        diagrams:

        #get Wasserstein distance between random graphs with the same structure
        ww<-rep(NA,100)

        for (i in 1:100){
          g1<-erdos.renyi.game(30,0.3)
          g2<-erdos.renyi.game(30,0.3)
          m1<-as.matrix(get.adjacency(g1))
          m2<-as.matrix(get.adjacency(g2))
          d1<-calculate_homology(m1,dim=2,format="cloud")
          d2<-calculate_homology(m2,dim=2,format="cloud")
          ww[i]<-phom.dist(d1,d2,limit.num=0)
        }

        #compute 95% confidence intervals from the simulated null distribution
        quantile(ww,c(0.025,0.975))

             This script creates a null distribution of Erdös–Renyi persistence dia-
        grams from the same distribution that the original persistence diagram was
        constructed from; your results may vary, given the random component to
        the simulation piece. Quantiles of our null distribution give a confidence
        interval of (0.91, 8.36), which includes quite a bit smaller distances than the
        distances computed between the persistence diagrams of the Erdös–Renyi
        graph and the Watts–Strogatz graph (23.59) and between the persistence
        diagrams of the Erdös–Renyi graph and the scale-free graph (39.78). Thus,
        we can conclude that the structures of the Watts–Strogatz graph and the
        scale-free graph are not random. There is a significant structural compo-
        nent to each of these graphs.
             This type of simulation can be very useful in testing differences between
        persistence diagrams of brain networks derived from fMRI and PET imag-
        ing studies, and it’s easy to implement in R. This methodology can also be
        applied to other networks with a hypothesized underlying structure, such as
        social networks or power grids. Many other types of network analysis tools
        can also be used to compare graph structures, such as local and global met-
        rics (including graph radius and diameter, degree distributions, clustering


                                                                              Network Filtration   93
            The Shape of Data (Sample Chapter) © 06/05/23 by Colleen Farrelly and Yaé Ulrich Gaba


                   graph coefficients, and so on), and many of these comparisons haven’t been
                   explored much yet.


     Summary
                   In this chapter, we filtered weighted networks to understand how network
                   metrics change as edges are removed based on their weights. Then, we built
                   simplicial complexes from network data to leverage several topological
                   tools, including an extension of the degree metric, the Euler characteris-
                   tic, and a filtration-based algorithm called persistent homology that can
                   be used to compare networks. In the next chapter, we’ll transition from
                   network science to distance geometry as we explore how different measure-
                   ment choices impact supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms.




94   Chapter 4
