Carbon (Early Access) ﻿©2021 by John Barnett




                                                 “        Nothing can dwindle to nothing,
                                               as Nature restores one thing from the stuff of another,




                                                                                           ”
                                                             nor does she allow a birth,
                                                           without a corresponding death.
                                                                    —Lucretius
                                                                                         Carbon (Early Access) ﻿©2021 by John Barnett




C



When telling a story, one is inclined to begin at the beginning. In this case, the
life story of a single atom of carbon, that beginning is an unfathomable 13.8 billion
years distant—when our universe announced its arrival with a Big Bang. To be more
accurate, it is another 500 million years hence, when the intensely hot and dense
early universe expanded and cooled enough to form its first elements—hydrogen and
helium—great clouds of which coalesced into our first stars. One such massive star
burned hot and bright and, as it neared its demise, got busy forming heavier elements.
Here is where our hero enters the stage—a product of the fusion of three helium
atoms. When this star finally explodes in a powerful and spectacular supernova, its
elements are cast upon the solar winds to new places, full of purpose without intent.
Carbon (Early Access) ﻿©2021 by John Barnett




                                                                                                              CC
                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                          CC
                                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                        C                         C
                                                                                                       CC     C               C   CC
                                                                                                                  C       C               C
                                                                                                      CC                              C
                                                                                                      C C       C         C               C
                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                        C C                       CC
                                                                                                         C            C           C
                                                                                                               C           C
                                                                                                              C C         C C




                                               On is the cosmic race. Quantum fluctuations and fundamental forces persuade
                                                  the distribution of matter and energy throughout the universe. Our carbon
                                                atom is swept along in a colossal tug-of-war between expansion and gravity,
                                                   matter and antimatter, weaving a tapestry of high and low densities. It is
                                                part of an aggregating protoplanet that is held within the attractive force of
                                                 a midsize star, which itself is kept among billions of others like it. A galaxy.
                                                      This galaxy, as well, maintains a fraternity of forces in the supercluster
                                                               Laniakea. This will be the atom’s neighborhood for some time.
                                                                                Carbon (Early Access) ﻿©2021 by John Barnett




C



Within one ordinary galaxy, the primordial nebula of one ordinary star
provides building materials for its developing satellites. A nearby iron- and
silicate-rich terrestrial mass, formed roughly 4.5 billion years ago, has
now cooled enough to foster some heavy cargo violently delivered. During
the chaos of the Bombardment Epoch, water from asteroids and volatile
elements from the protoplanet fall to the gravitational attraction of a
young planet Earth. This story’s principal particle is one of many migrant
seeds that have now been planted in a Goldilocks mantle.
                                                                            Carbon (Early Access) ﻿©2021 by John Barnett




Carbon’s ease—eagerness really—in forming bonds and helping
facilitate long molecular chains will prove crucial to building intricate
and versatile structures. Our carbon atom forms just such an alliance
with two oxygen atoms, and a molecule is made—one we will see
often—carbon dioxide. It dissolves in an iron-rich, incipient ocean.
   Around 3.8 billion years ago that molecule visits a Lost City at the
bottom of the Hadean global brine. Here are the calcium carbonate
towers of mid-Atlantic hydrothermal vents. Within their catalytic
cathedrals is a serpentine structure providing suitable harbor for
meetings of cold acidic sea with warm alkaline fluids released from
Earth’s mantle. CO2 and hydrogen mingle in a matrix of temperature
and pH gradients: a fortuitous confluence—a cellular template, if you
will—for the development and replication of complex organic life.




O     C      O
