               Browser Support
                               A
           Since writing this book, much has changed
           in the browser market. The Chromium
          project, which the Chrome browser is based
        on, stopped using WebKit and created their
own fork, called Blink. This in turn meant that Opera,
who as the book went to press stated they would be
dropping their own engine and basing them­selves on Chromium, would
also use Blink. Additionally, new versions of Internet Explorer and Safari
(11 and 7, respectively) have been released.
     Documenting feature implementation in browsers means aiming at a
moving target, so the best I can do is take a snapshot. When considering
whether to use one of the features in this book, always check the following
sites for the most up-to-date information:

•   HTML5 Please, http://html5please.com/
•   The CSS3 Test, http://css3test.com/
•   The HTML5 Test, http://html5test.com/
•   Can I Use..., http://caniuse.com/
                       When I started this book midway through 2012, I took a gamble on
                   which features I thought would be best to cover, including not only those
                   that had already been well-implemented but also some that I thought stood
                   a good chance of being implemented when the book went to print (or soon
                   after). As I write this in late 2013, it seems that the pace of wider adoption
                   has been slower than I anticipated for some of the features contained in
                   IE10 (such as Grid Layout, Regions and Exclusions), but everything else is
                   proceeding apace.


     The Browsers in Question
                   Far too many browsers exist for me to provide a decent overview of feature
                   support on each. Instead, in this appendix, I’ll stick to the key modern
                   desktop browsers—Chrome, Firefox, IE10 and above, and Safari—and
                   their mobile equivalents, as I’ve done throughout this book.
                        As this book was going to press, Opera announced that they would be
                   phasing out their own Presto rendering engine and future versions of the
                   browser would instead use Chromium, the branch of WebKit that Chrome
                   is also based on. That doesn’t mean Presto will be going away in the short
                   term—it’s already embedded on many devices that don’t tend to update,
                   such as TVs and games consoles. In the longer term, feature support should
                   be considered the same as Chrome, but I’ve kept it distinguished here for
                   legacy support.
                        When discussing mobile browsers, I usually mean both smartphone and
                   tablet and, more often than not, that means Safari mobile and the Android
                   browser (although both are based on WebKit, there’s quite a deal of variety
                   between them). Firefox, Internet Explorer, and Opera use the same render-
                   ing engine across different platforms (although see the previous paragraph
                   about Opera), so I’ll only mention the mobile version of those browsers
                   where any differences exist (which is not often).
                        When I refer to Android, I mean the stock browser that comes with
                   many versions of the Android OS. Some versions of Android include the
                   new mobile version of Chrome, which, like Firefox and Opera, can be con-
                   sidered more or less equivalent to its desktop sibling.
                        As I’ve mentioned before, there really is no substitute for testing on
                   actual devices. If possible, you should create a device library or join one in
                   your area; if that’s completely out of the question, ask other developers for
                   their experiences.


     Enabling Experimental Features
                   Many browsers, especially Chrome and Firefox, are being much more cau-
                   tious than they used to with regard to implementing experimental features.
                   Where previously they would implement features with a vendor prefix and
                   roll them out to all users, now they usually require that you explicitly enable
                   certain features with a configuration flag.
                        In Firefox, you do this by entering about:config in the URL bar, at which
                   point you’ll see a message that warns you of the consequences of dabbling

212   Appendix A
        in the browser’s inner workings. If this doesn’t deter you, you can find the
        feature you want and enable it before restarting your browser in order to
        gain access to the now-enabled feature.
             In Chrome, the process is much the same, except that you enter
        chrome://flags, no warning message appears, and the features are usually
        enabled by toggling a link marked Enable.


Chapter 1: The Web Platform
        Every major modern desktop browser comes with a set of developer tools
        that include a console (only Internet Explorer 7 and below don’t have one).
        The situation on mobile and tablet is a bit more complicated: most browsers
        don’t have developer tools by default, but they can be connected to their
        desktop equivalents for debugging, as explained “Test and Test and Test
        Some More” on page 19.


Chapter 2: Structure and Semantics
        The newer HTML5 structuring elements appear in IE9 and above and all
        other major modern browsers. Discussion around some of these elements
        is still ongoing as I write this. A main element was recently added, which is
        natively supported in Firefox and Chrome, while other elements are at risk
        of being dropped.
              Using the attribute-based accessibility and semantic extensions WAI-
        ARIA, microformats, RDFa, and microdata in any browser is completely
        safe. The microdata API is implemented in Firefox and Opera but has
        recently been dropped from Chrome due to a perceived lack of interest.
              Data attributes are also supported in all browsers, although the API
        using dataset is not present in IE10 and below, or Android 2.3 and below.
        The jQuery method works cross browser.


Chapter 3: Device-Responsive CSS
        As I write this, Media Queries are available in IE9 and above and all other
        major modern browsers. The media features related to device ­dimensions
        are the most widely implemented. The resolution media feature is in Chrome,
        Firefox, and IE10 and above, but not yet in Safari (despite being imple-
        mented in the WebKit engine at the end of 2012).
             The devicePixelRatio attribute is in IE11 and all other modern browsers,
        including mobile versions. The dppx unit is implemented in Chrome and
        Firefox.
             The @viewport rule is in old Opera, IE10 and above, and WebKit, using
        the vendor prefix of each. The matchMedia API is in IE10 and above and all
        other modern ­browsers, but not in Android 2.3 and below.
             The CSS box-sizing property is in all browsers, although it requires a ven­
        dor prefix in Firefox and in Android 3.0 and below. Only Firefox supports
        the non-standard padding-box value. The calc() value function is in IE9 and
        above and in other modern browsers, although it requires a -­webkit- prefix

                                                                       Browser Support   213
                   in Safari 6 and below (Mac OS and iOS). It’s not implemented in Android
                   or Opera.
                        The viewport-relative length units— vh, vw, etc.—are in IE9 (with a
                   few bugs) and IE10 and above, Firefox, and most WebKit browsers except
                   Android, but they are not present in Opera. The rem unit is in IE9 and
                   above and in all other modern browsers.
                        The object-fit and object-position properties are implemented in Opera
                   only and marked as “at risk” in the spec so face an uncertain future, espe-
                   cially now that Opera is based on Chromium. This was one of the risks I
                   took in the book which didn’t pay off.


     Chapter 4: New Approaches to CSS Layouts
                   The multi-column layout properties are implemented in IE10 and above
                   and all other modern browsers. The use of vendor prefixes is required in
                   all browsers but Internet Explorer and old Opera. Firefox lacks support for
                   the column-span property. Only old Opera and IE10 and above support the
                   break-before and break-after properties.
                        Flexbox is supported in all major browsers, but with caveats. In Safari
                   (iOS and Mac OS) the -webkit- vendor prefix is required, and Safari 6 and
                   below use a hybrid of the current syntax and an older one: the justify-
                   content property isn’t implemented, and it instead has the old box-pack prop-
                   erty. This has been fixed in Safari 7.
                        IE10 also uses an outdated syntax, with the -ms- prefix; I recommend
                   you read the documentation in the IE10 Guide for Developers (http://msdn
                   .microsoft.com/library/ie/hh673531%28v=vs.85%29.aspx/) for detailed infor-
                   mation. This is fixed in IE11, and the prefix has been removed.
                        Firefox has an unprefixed implementation but only supports single-line
                   flexbox, so the flex-wrap and flex-flow properties are ignored.
                        The Grid Layout module has changed syntax again since the release
                   of the book. As explained in Chapter 4, IE10 and above currently supports
                   an older version of the syntax with the -ms- prefix. Apple announced that
                   Safari 7 would have an implementation using a more up-to-date syntax, but
                   that doesn’t seem to be the case in the final release. The grid-template prop-
                   erty is not currently implemented in any browser.


     Chapter 5: Modern JavaScript
                   The async attribute is in IE10 and most other browsers besides Android ver-
                   sions 2.3 and below and old Opera. The defer attribute is the same but also
                   has support at least back to IE8.
                       The addEventListener() method is in IE9 and above and all other major
                   browsers, as is the DOMContentLoaded event.
                       Despite the uncertainty around existing patents, touch events are in
                   Chrome, Firefox, Opera, Safari for iOS, and Android. IE10 and above has
                   support for pointer events, such as MSPointerDown, which are vendor prefixed.
                       The querySelector() and querySelectorAll() methods are fully implemented
                   in all modern browsers, from IE8 and above. The getElementsByClassName()

214   Appendix A
        method is almost as well implemented, lacking support for IE8 only. The
        classList object is in IE10 and above and most other browsers bar Android
        2.3 and below.


Chapter 6: Device APIs
        The Geolocation API is in IE9 and all other major browsers. Device orien-
        tation is present in mobile WebKit browsers, Chrome, and Firefox mobile.
        Do bear in mind, however, that device APIs depend on certain functions
        being available on the phone; just because the Device Orientation API is
        implemented in a browser, it doesn’t necessarily follow that the device has
        an accelerometer.
              The Full Screen API is implemented in IE11 and all other modern
        browsers, all with appropriate vendor prefixes. Firefox’s implementation
        differs from the spec, but rather than trying to explain that here, I refer
        you to the Mozilla Developer Network article, “Using Fullscreen Mode”
        (http://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Guide/API/DOM/Using_full_
        screen_mode/) Firefox, WebKit and Blink, and IE11 support the :full-screen
        pseudo-class, again with respective prefixes.
              The Vibration, Battery Status, and Network Information APIs are avail-
        able in Firefox mobile only. Chrome 30 introduced implementation of Vibra­
        tion, but it’s currently flagged off by default. Despite support for the others
        apparently landing in WebKit throughout 2012, I can’t find any working
        implementations.
              The getUserMedia() method is implemented in old Opera, and in Firefox
        and Chrome with vendor prefixes (mozGetUserMedia, webkitGetUserMedia).
              Web Storage is in IE8 and above and all other major browsers. The Drag
        and Drop API is partially supported in IE8 and IE9, and fully implemented
        in IE10 and above and in other major desktop browsers. Owing to its nature,
        it isn’t supported in mobile browsers.
              The File API is fully implemented in Firefox, Chrome, Safari (iOS
        and Mac OS), and Opera, and partially supported in IE10 and above and
        Android. The FileReader API is fully implemented in IE10 and above and
        all other desktop browsers, plus WebKit mobile browsers including Android
        version 3.0 and above.


Chapter 7: Images and Graphics
         Some form of SVG support is present in IE9 and above, Android 3.0 and
         above, and all other major browsers. SVG filters are slightly more limited,
         being unavailable in Android and available with strong limitations in IE9
         and above, although using SVG filters on HTML elements only works reli-
         ably in Firefox. The new CSS filter() function is implemented in Chrome
        and Safari with the -webkit- prefix. The use of fragment identifiers in SVG
         is only possible in IE10 and above and in Firefox.
              Support for the canvas element is in IE9 and above and in all other
        major browsers. Firefox, Chrome, Safari (desktop), and Opera all have
        implementations of WebGL, although it’s disabled by default in some
        ­browsers, notably Safari and Chrome for Android.

                                                                      Browser Support   215
     Chapter 8: New Forms
                   Levels of support for the various form elements, especially those with on-
                   screen controls, vary wildly among browsers and are changing all the time.
                   Rather than try to capture that here, see the HTML5 Test, which has the
                   most comprehensive and up-to-date coverage. Using the new input types is
                   generally considered safe, as the browser will fall back to the text type if a
                   different value is not recognized.
                       The Form Validation API is present in IE10 and above and in all
                   other major ­browsers. Safari supports the API but has no on-screen error
                   notifications.


     Chapter 9: Multimedia
                   The video and audio elements, along with their related APIs, are in IE9 and
                   above and in all other major browsers, although with the caveat about sup-
                   ported file types discussed in Chapter 9. The track element is supported in
                   the desktop versions of IE10 and above, Safari 6 and above, Chrome, and
                   Opera; Chrome for Android is the only mobile browser to offer support.
                   Media Fragments are implemented in Firefox and WebKit browsers.
                       The Web Audio API is experimentally implemented in Chrome and
                   Safari (iOS and desktop), using the webkitAudioContext() constructor, and
                   work is underway to bring it to Firefox. Of Web RTC, only the getUserMedia()
                   method is currently supported, as mentioned in Chapter 6.


     Chapter 10: Web Apps
                   Support for AppCache is present in IE10 and all other major browsers.


     Chapter 11: The Future
                   Chrome offers the most support for the new Web Components features;
                   it has implemented the Shadow DOM, created with the createShadowRoot()
                   method, but it must be explicitly enabled. The template element is imple-
                   mented in Chrome and Firefox, as is support for scoped styles and registra-
                   tion of custom elements using document.register().
                        CSS regions are implemented in IE10 and above, Safari 7, and Chrome.
                   All require vendor prefixes on the properties, and IE10 and above only
                   allows content inside an iframe as the source.
                        Exclusions are available exclusively in IE10 and above, using the
                   -ms- prefix.
                        The Feature Queries @supports rule and CSS.supports() DOM method
                   are available in Chrome and Firefox.
                        Cascading Variables are implemented in Chrome only and must be
                   explicitly enabled.




216   Appendix A
