JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan




                                  3
          C O M P O U N D DATA T Y P E S




              In the previous chapter we discussed
              JavaScript’s primitive data types, which rep-
            resent a single piece of data, like a number or
         a string. Now ­we’ll look at JavaScript’s compound
data types, arrays and objects, which combine multiple
pieces of data into a single unit. Compound data types
are an essential part of programming because they allow
us to o­ rganize and work with collections of data of any
size. You’ll learn how to create and manipulate arrays
and objects, and how to combine them into more com-
plex data structures.
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


     Arrays
                 A JavaScript array is a compound data type that holds an ordered list of
                 values. The ele­ments of an array can be of any data type. They ­don’t all
                 have to be the same type, although they typically are. For instance, an array
                 might function as a to-do list by holding a series of strings describing tasks
                 that need to be performed, or it might hold a collection of numbers repre-
                 senting temperature readings taken at regular intervals from a par­t ic­u­lar
                 location.
                     Arrays are perfect for t­ hese sorts of structures b
                                                                        ­ ecause they collect the
                 related values together in one place, and they have the flexibility to grow
                 and shrink as values are added or removed. If you had a fixed number of
                 to-do items—­say, four—­then you might use separate variables to hold them,
                 but using an array enables you to hold an unbounded, changing number of
                 items and keep them in a fixed order. Also, once you have your ele­ments
                 together in a single array, you can write code to efficiently operate on each
                 item in the array in turn, as you’ll see in Chapter 4.

                 Creation and Indexing
                 To create an array, list its ele­ments separated by commas inside a pair of
                 square brackets:

                 let primes = [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19];
                 primes;
                 (8) [2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19]

                 This array contains the first eight prime numbers and is stored in the primes
                 variable. When you enter primes; the Chrome console should print the length
                 of the array (8) followed by its ele­ments.
                      ­Every ele­ment in an array has an index number associated with it. Like
                 strings, arrays are zero-­indexed, so the first ele­ment is found at index 0, the
                 second at index 1, and so on. To access an individual ele­ment of an array,
                 place its index number in square brackets a­ fter the name of the array. H  ­ ere,
                 for example, we access the first ele­ment of the primes array:

                 primes[0];
                 2

                     ­Because arrays are zero-­indexed, the index of the last ele­ment of the
                 array is one less than the array’s length. So, the last ele­ment of our eight-­
                 element primes array is at index 7:

                 primes[7];
                 19

                     If you d
                            ­ on’t know how long an array is and you want to get its last ele­
                 ment, you can first use dot notation to access its length property and look up
                 the array’s length, as we did with strings in Chapter 2:


38   Chapter 3
 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


primes.length;
8
primes[7];
19

Or, to do this in a single statement, you can simply subtract 1 from the
length to get the ele­ment at the last index, like so:

primes[primes.length - 1];
19

    If you use an index outside the range of the array, JavaScript returns
undefined:

primes[10];
undefined

    To replace an ele­ment in an array, assign the ele­ment a new value using
indexing syntax:

primes[2] = 1;
primes;
(8) [2, 3, 1, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19]

­Here we add a 1 in the third position (index 2) of primes, replacing the value
that was previously at that index. The console output confirms that 1 is the
 new third ele­ment in the array.

Arrays of Arrays
Arrays can contain other arrays. ­These multidimensional arrays are often
used to represent two-­dimensional grids of points, or ­t ables. To illustrate
this, let’s make a s­ imple tic-­t ac-­toe game. ­We’ll create an array (­we’ll call
this the outer array) containing three ele­ments, each of which is another
array (­we’ll call ­these the inner arrays) representing one of the rows of the
tic-­t ac-­toe board. Each inner array ­w ill contain three empty strings to repre-
sent the squares within that row:

let ticTacToe = [
   ["", "", ""],
   ["", "", ""],
   ["", "", ""]
];

     In order to make the code easier to read, I’ve put each inner array on
 a new line. Usually when you press enter (commonly to start a new line),
 the JavaScript console w­ ill run the line of code you just entered, but in this
 case, it’s clever enough to realize that the first line i­ sn’t finished, b
                                                                           ­ ecause
­there’s no closing square bracket to match the opening bracket. It ­w ill



                                                                 Compound Data Types   39
                   JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                 interpret every­thing up to the final closing bracket and semicolon as a sin-
                 gle statement, even if you include additional brackets and carriage returns.

       NOTE      The Chrome console automatically applies indentation to the inner arrays, to indi-
                 cate that ­they’re nested inside the outer array. Chrome and VS Code by default use
                 four spaces for each level of indentation, but this is a m
                                                                          ­ atter of personal preference.
                 Throughout this book I’ll be using two spaces for indentation, both b­ ecause this is
                 more common in modern JavaScript code and ­because it helps some of the bigger list-
                 ings fit on the page.

                       I could have written this array on one line, as shown h
                                                                             ­ ere, but this way
                 it’s harder to see its two-­dimensionality:

                 let ticTacToeOneLine = [["", "", ""], ["", "", ""], ["", "", ""]];

                     Now let’s see what happens when we ask the console for the value of the
                 ticTacToe variable:

                 ticTacToe;
                 (3) [Array(3), Array(3), Array(3)]

                 In this case, the length of the outer array is shown as (3), indicating that it’s
                 an array with three ele­ments. Each ele­ment of the array is Array(3), which
                 means each inner array is another three-­element array.
                     To expand the view and see what’s in ­those inner arrays, click the arrow
                 on the left:

                  (3) [Array(3), Array(3), Array(3)]
                 	 0: (3) ['', '', '']
                 	 1: (3) ['', '', '']
                 	 2: (3) ['', '', '']
                 	  length: 3
                 	 [[Prototype]]: Array(0)

                 The first three lines show the values of the inner arrays at indexes 0, 1, and 2.
                 ­ fter ­these, the outer array’s length property is shown, with its value of 3. The
                 A
                 final property, [[Prototype]], is where the array’s built-in methods come from
                 (more on this in Chapter 6).
                      ­We’ve created our tic-­t ac-­toe board, but it’s empty. Let’s set an X in the
                 top-­r ight corner. The first inner array represents the top row; we access it
                 with ticTacToe[0]. The top-­r ight corner is the third ele­ment of that row, or
                 index 2 of the inner array. ­Because ticTacToe[0] returns an array, we can just
                 add [2] on the end to access the ele­ment we want: ticTacToe[0][2]. Knowing
                 this, we can set this ele­ment to "X" as follows:

                 ticTacToe[0][2] = "X";

                    Now let’s look at the value of ticTacToe again, clicking the arrow to
                 expand the outer array:


40   Chapter 3
 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


ticTacToe;
 (3) [Array(3), Array(3), Array(3)]
	 0: (3) ['', '', 'X']
	 1: (3) ['', '', '']
	 2: (3) ['', '', '']
	 length: 3
	 [[Prototype]]: Array(0)

The top-­r ight corner of the tic-­t ac-­toe board now contains an X.
     Next, let’s set an O in the bottom-­left corner. The bottom row is index 2
of the outer array, and the leftmost square of that row is index 0 of the inner
array, so we enter the following:

ticTacToe[2][0] = "O";
ticTacToe;
 (3) [Array(3), Array(3), Array(3)]
	 0: (3) ['', '', 'X']
	 1: (3) ['', '', '']
	 2: (3) ['O', '', '']
	  length: 3
	 [[Prototype]]: Array(0)

Now ­there’s an O in the bottom-­left corner of the board.
    To summarize, if you want to access an ele­ment in a nested array, use
one set of square brackets to select the ele­ment in the outer array (which
returns one of the inner arrays), then a second set to select the ele­ment in
the inner array.



                                 TRY IT YOURSELF


    3-1.		Play a game of tic-­tac-­toe against yourself, using the ticTacToe array.
          Remember, the first index number should be the row of the board, and
          the second index number should be the column.




Array Methods
JavaScript has several useful methods for working with arrays. W    ­ e’ll look at a
few impor­t ant ones in this section. Some of t­ hese methods modify the array
in question, which is known as mutation. Example mutations include adding
or deleting array ele­ments, or changing the ele­ments’ order. Other methods
create and return a new array while leaving the original array unchanged,
which is useful if you still need the original array for other purposes.
       It’s impor­t ant to be aware of ­whether or not the method ­you’re using
­w ill mutate the array. For example, say you have an array containing the
 months of the year listed chronologically, but one part of your program
 needs them in alphabetical order. You’d want to be sure that alphabetizing

                                                                     Compound Data Types   41
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                 the months ­doesn’t inadvertently change the original, chronological array,
                 or other parts of your program might start thinking April is the first month
                 of the year. On the other hand, if you have an array representing a to-do
                 list, you’d prob­ably want the original array itself to be updated when a task
                 is added or removed, rather than creating a new array.

                 Adding an Ele­ment to an Array
                 The push method mutates an array by adding a supplied ele­ment to the end
                 of the array. The return value of the push method is the new length of the
                 array. As an example, let’s use push to build up an array of programming
                 languages:

                 let languages = [];
                 languages.push("Python");
                 1
                 languages.push("Haskell");
                 2
                 languages.push("JavaScript");
                 3
                 languages.push("Rust");
                 4
                 languages;
                 (4) ['Python', 'Haskell', 'JavaScript', 'Rust']

                      First we create a new array called languages and initialize it with [],
                 an empty array. The first time we call the push method, we pass the value
                 "Python". The method returns 1, which means t­ here’s now one ele­ment in
                 the array. We do this three more times, and fi­nally ask for the value of
                 languages by entering languages;. This returns the four languages we added
                 to the array, in the order we added them.
                      To add an ele­ment to the beginning of the array rather than the end,
                 use the unshift method, like so:

                 languages.unshift("Erlang");
                 5
                 languages.unshift("C");
                 6
                 languages.unshift("Fortran");
                 7
                 languages;
                 (7) ['Fortran', 'C', 'Erlang', 'Python', 'Haskell', 'JavaScript', 'Rust']

                     ­Here w­ e’ve added three more languages to the front of the languages
                 array. B
                        ­ ecause each ele­ment is added to the beginning of the array, they
                 end up in the opposite order to how they ­were added. Like push, calling
                 unshift returns the new length of the array.




42   Chapter 3
 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


Removing Ele­ments from an Array
To mutate an array by removing its last ele­ment, use the pop method. H ­ ere
we call the pop method on the languages array, deleting its last ele­ment:

languages.pop();
'Rust'
languages;
(6) ['Fortran', 'C', 'Erlang', 'Python', 'Haskell', 'JavaScript']

The method returns the value of the ele­ment being removed, in this case
"Rust". When we then check the array, it contains only six ele­ments.
      ­Because the pop method returns the array ele­ment being removed,
it’s particularly useful if you want to do something with that ele­ment as
­you’re removing it. For example, h­ ere we delete another ele­ment from the
languages array and use it in a message:

let bestLanguage = languages.pop();
let message = `My favorite language is ${bestLanguage}.`;
message;
'My favorite language is JavaScript.'
languages;
(5) ['Fortran', 'C', 'Erlang', 'Python', 'Haskell']

     This time when we call languages.pop() we store the method’s return
value in the bestLanguage variable, which we incorporate into a string using a
template literal. When we print the resulting message, it includes the word
JavaScript. This was the ele­ment removed from the array, which is now down
to five languages.
     To remove the first ele­ment from an array, rather than the last, use the
shift method. Like pop, the shift method returns the removed ele­ment:

let worstLanguage = languages.shift();
message = `My least favorite language is ${worstLanguage}.`;
message;
'My least favorite language is Fortran.'
languages;
(4) ['C', 'Erlang', 'Python', 'Haskell']

     As with the previous example, we save the result of calling shift in
a variable, this time called worstLanguage, and use it in a template literal.
This variable contains the string "Fortran", and languages is left with four
ele­ments.
     The four methods w  ­ e’ve looked at so far, pop, unshift, push, and shift, are
commonly used to implement more specialized data structures, like queues.
A queue is a data structure that resembles a line of p  ­ eople, where new items
are added to the end and items are removed and pro­cessed from the begin-
ning. This is useful when you want to ­process data in the order it arrives.
For example, imagine a Q and A app, where many users can ask questions.
You could use an array to store the list of questions, with the push method


                                                                Compound Data Types   43
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                 adding each new question to the end of the array. When the answerer is
                 ready to answer a question, they would use shift to get the first ele­ment in
                 the array and remove it from the array. This ensures that only unanswered
                 questions are in the array, and that ­they’re answered in the order they ­were
                 received.



                                                 TRY IT YOURSELF


                     3-2.	Create a new empty array and save it in a variable called rainbow (see
                           the section “Adding an Ele­ment to an Array” on page 42 to see how to
                           create a new empty array). Your task is to add the colors of the rainbow
                           ("Red", "Orange", "Yellow", "Green", "Blue", "Indigo", "Violet") to this
                           array, but with a twist: you must start by adding "Green", and use push
                           and unshift to add the rest. If you make a ­mistake, you can use pop or
                           shift to remove the color you just added.




                 Combining Arrays
                 The concat method (short for concatenate) adds two arrays together. H
                                                                                     ­ ere,
                 for example, we start with two arrays, fish and mammals, and combine them
                 into a new array, saving that into the animals variable:

                 let fish = ["Salmon", "Cod", "Trout"];
                 let mammals = ["Sheep", "Cat", "Tiger"];
                 let animals = fish​.concat(mammals);
                 animals;
                 (6) ['Salmon', 'Cod', 'Trout', 'Sheep', 'Cat', 'Tiger']

                       When you call concat on an array, a new array is created with all the ele­
                 ments from the first array (the array on which you called concat) followed
                 by all the ele­ments from the second array (the array passed as an argument
                 to concat). The original arrays remain unchanged ­because, unlike the other
                 methods w   ­ e’ve looked at so far, concat ­isn’t a mutating method. This is use-
                 ful ­here, ­because we ­wouldn’t want our fish array to suddenly contain the
                 ele­ments from mammals!
                       To combine three or more arrays, pass multiple arrays as arguments to
                 concat, as in this example:

let originals = ["Hope", "Empire", "Jedi"];
let prequels = ["Phantom", "Clones", "Sith"];
let sequels = ["Awakens", "Last", "Rise"];
let starWars = prequels​
                       .concat(originals, sequels);
starWars;
(9) ['Phantom', 'Clones', 'Sith', 'Hope', 'Empire', 'Jedi', 'Awakens', 'Last', 'Rise']




44   Chapter 3
 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


­Here we create three separate arrays, originals, prequels, and sequels, repre-
senting the three sets of Star Wars movies. Then we use concat to combine
them into a single nine-­element starWars array. Notice that the ele­ments in
the combined array appear in the order in which the arrays w   ­ ere passed as
arguments.

Finding the Index of an Ele­ment in an Array
To find out where a par­tic­u­lar ele­ment is in an array, use the indexOf method.
This method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified ele­ment.
If the ele­ment ­isn’t found in the array, indexOf returns -1:

let sizes = ["Small", "Medium", "Large"];
sizes​.indexOf("Medium");
1
sizes​.indexOf("Huge");
-1

In this example, we want to check the position of "Medium" in the sizes array,
and we get back the answer 1. Then, b  ­ ecause "Huge" ­isn’t in the array, we get
the answer -1.
    If the array contains multiple instances of the given value, indexOf returns
the index of the first matching ele­ment only. For example, ­here’s an array
with the colors of the flag of Argentina:

let flagOfArgentina = ["Blue", "White", "Blue"];
flagOfArgentina​.indexOf("Blue");
0

Even though "Blue" is found twice in the array, indexOf returns only the
index of the first occurrence.

Turning an Array into a String
The join method converts an array into a single string, joining all the ele­
ments together, as shown ­here:

let beatles = ["John", "Paul", "George", "Ringo"];
beatles.join();
'John,Paul,George,Ringo'

    Notice how the separate strings in the beatles array are combined into
one string. By default, join places a comma between each ele­ment to form
the returned string. To change this, you can give your own separator as an
argument to join. For example, if you want nothing in between each ele­
ment, pass an empty string as an argument:

beatles.join("");
'JohnPaulGeorgeRingo'




                                                                 Compound Data Types   45
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                     You can pass any valid string as a separator. In the next example,
                 we pass a space, an ampersand, and a newline escape character to set
                 each ele­ment on its own line. As you learned in Chapter 2, we have to use
                 console.log for the newlines to display correctly in Chrome:

                 console.log(beatles.join("&\n"));
                 John&
                 Paul&
                 George&
                 Ringo

                        Keep in mind that the separator appears only between array ele­ments,
                 not ­a fter each one. This is why ­there i­ sn’t an extra ampersand and newline
                  ­a fter Ringo.
                        If you use join on an array containing non-­string values, ­those values
                 ­w ill be converted to strings, as in this example:

                 [100, true, false, "hi"].join(" - ");
                 '100 - true - false - hi'

                      As with the previous joins, the result is one long string, joined together
                 by the separator (in this case, " - "). The difference is that the non-­string
                 values (the number 100 and the Booleans true and false) had to be automat-
                 ically converted to strings before the join. This example also shows how you
                 can call array methods directly on array literals, rather than having to save
                 the array into a variable first.



                                                 TRY IT YOURSELF


                     3-3.	Use the join method to convert the array ["X", "X", "X"] into the string
                           "XoXoX".




                 Other Useful Array Methods
                 ­Here are some other useful array methods you might want to try out:
                     arr​.includes(elem) ​  ​Returns true or false depending on w
                                                                                ­ hether a given
                     elem is in the arr array.
                     arr.reverse() ​  ​Reverses the order of ele­ments in the array. This is a
                     mutating method, so it modifies the original array.
                     arr.sort() ​  ​Sorts the array ele­ments, modifying the original array. If
                     the ele­ments are strings, t­ hey’re sorted in alphabetical order. Other­
                     wise, the sorting happens as if the ele­ments w  ­ ere converted to strings.
                     arr.slice(start, end) ​  ​Creates a new array by extracting ele­ments from
                     the original array starting at index start, up to but not including index end.


46   Chapter 3
           JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


              This method is equivalent to the slice method on strings, introduced
              in the previous chapter. If you call slice() without any arguments,
              the entire array is copied into a new array. This is useful if you need
              to use a mutating method like sort but you ­don’t want to mutate the
              original array.
              arr.splice(index, count) ​  ​Removes count ele­ments from the array, start-
              ing at index.


Objects
           Objects are another compound data type in JavaScript. ­They’re similar to
           arrays in that they hold a collection of values, but they differ in that objects
           use strings called keys instead of numeric indices to access the values. Each
           key is associated with a specific value, forming a key-­value pair.
                Whereas arrays are commonly used to store ordered lists of ele­ments
           of the same data type, objects are usually used to store multiple pieces of
           information about a single entity. ­These pieces of information often are
           not all of the same data type. For example, an object representing a per-
           son might hold information like the person’s name (a string), their age (a
           number), ­whether or not t­ hey’re married (a Boolean), and so on. Objects
           are better suited for this purpose than arrays b­ ecause each piece of infor-
           mation is given a meaningful name—­its key—­rather than a generic index
           number. It’s much clearer what the values 35 and true mean if ­they’re stored
          in a person object u­ nder the keys "age" and "married" than it would be if they
          ­were stored in a person array ­under the indices 1 and 2.

          Creating Objects
          One way to create an object is with an object literal, which consists of a pair of
          braces ({ and }) enclosing a series of key-­value pairs, separated by commas.
          Each key-­value pair must have a colon between the key and the value. For
          example, ­here’s an object literal called casablanca containing some informa-
          tion about that movie:

          let casablanca = {
             "title": "Casablanca",
             "released": 1942,
             "director": "Michael Curtiz"
          };
          casablanca;
           {title: 'Casablanca', released: 1942, director: 'Michael Curtiz'}

              ­Here we create a new object with three keys: "title", "released", and
          "director". Each key has a value associated with it. I’ve written each key-­
          value pair on its own line to make the object literal easier to read, but this
          ­isn’t strictly necessary. As you’ll see in ­later examples, the key-­value pairs
           can also all be written on the same line.



                                                                           Compound Data Types   47
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                      All object keys are strings, but if your key is a valid identifier, it’s com-
                 mon practice to omit the quotes. A valid identifier is any series of characters
                 that can be used as a JavaScript variable name. An identifier can consist of
                 letters, numbers, and the characters _ and $, but it c­ an’t start with a num-
                 ber. It also ­can’t contain other symbols, like *, (, or #, nor can it include
                 whitespace characters like spaces and newlines. ­These other characters
                 are allowed in object keys, but only if the key is enclosed in quotes. For
                 example:

                 let obj = { key1: 1, key_2: 2, "key 3": 3, "key#4": 4 };
                 obj;
                  {key1: 1, key_2: 2, key 3: 3, key#4: 4}

                 H
                 ­ ere key1 and key_2 are valid identifiers, so they ­don’t need quotes. However,
                 key 3 contains a space and key#4 contains a hash mark, making them invalid
                 identifiers. They must be enclosed in quotes to be used as object keys.

                 Accessing Object Values
                 To get the value associated with a key, call the name of the object with the
                 string key in square brackets:

                 obj["key 3"];
                 3
                 casablanca["title"];
                 'Casablanca'

                 This is just like the syntax for accessing an ele­ment from an array, but
                 instead of using the numeric index, you use the string key.
                     For keys that are valid identifiers, you can use dot notation instead of
                 square brackets, with the key name coming ­a fter the dot:

                 obj.key_2;
                 2

                  This d ­ oesn’t work for keys that ­aren’t valid identifiers. For example, you
                  ­can’t write obj.key 3 ­because to JavaScript that looks like obj.key followed
                 ­a fter the space by the number literal 3.
                        Notice that this dot notation looks like the syntax we used for accessing
                  the length property of strings (in Chapter 2) and arrays (­earlier in this chap-
                   ter). That’s ­because it’s the same ­thing! A property is just another name for
                   a key-­value pair. ­Behind the scenes, JavaScript treats strings like objects, and
                 arrays, too, are actually a special kind of object. When we write something
                 like [1, 2, 3].length, we say ­we’re accessing the array’s length property, but
                  we could also say w   ­ e’re getting the value associated with the array’s length
                   key. Likewise, when we write something like casablanca.title, we often say
                   ­we’re accessing the object’s title property instead of the value associated
                    with its title key.



48   Chapter 3
 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


Setting Object Values
To add a new key-­value pair to an object, use the same bracket or dot nota-
tion used to look up a value. H
                              ­ ere, for example, we set up an empty dictionary
object, then add two definitions:

let dictionary = {};
dictionary.mouse = "A small rodent";
dictionary["computer mouse"] = "A pointing device for computers";
dictionary;
 {mouse: 'A small rodent', computer mouse: 'A pointing device for computers'}

    We first create a new, empty object using a pair of empty braces. We
then set two new keys, "mouse" and "computer mouse", giving each a defini-
tion as a value. As before, we can use dot notation with the valid identifier
mouse, but we need bracket notation for "computer mouse" ­because it contains
a space.
    Changing the value associated with a key that already exists follows the
same syntax:

dictionary.mouse = "A furry rodent";
dictionary;
 {mouse: 'A furry rodent', computer mouse: 'A pointing device for computers'}

The output confirms that the definition for mouse has been updated.

Working with Objects
 JavaScript has plenty of methods for working with objects; w  ­ e’ll examine a
 few of the most common ones ­here. Unlike with arrays, where the methods
 are called directly on the array you want to operate on, object methods are
 called as static methods by entering Object.methodName() and passing the object
 you want to operate on as an argument inside the parentheses. ­Here, Object
is a constructor, a type of function used to create objects, and static methods are
methods defined directly on the constructor instead of on a par­tic­u­lar object.
­We’ll discuss constructors in more detail in Chapter 6.

Getting an Object’s Keys
To get an array of all the keys of an object, use the static method Object.keys.
For example, h­ ere’s how you could retrieve the names of my cats:

let cats = { "Kiki": "black and white", "Mei": "tabby", "Moona": "gray" };
Object.keys(cats);
(3) ['Kiki', 'Mei', 'Moona']

The cats object has three key-­value pairs, where each key represents a cat
name and each value represents that cat’s color. Object.keys returns just the
keys, as an array of strings.



                                                                 Compound Data Types   49
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                      Object.keys can be helpful in cases like this where the only pieces
                 of information you need from an object are the names of its keys. For
                 example, you might have an object tracking how much money you owe
                 your friends, where the keys are your friends’ names and the values are the
                 amounts owed. With Object.keys you can list just the names of the friends
                 that ­you’re tracking, giving you a general sense of whom you owe money to.
                      You might be wondering why keys is a static method—­that is, why we
                 need to call it with Object.keys(cats) rather than with cats.keys(). To under-
                 stand why this is the case, consider this piano object:

                 let piano = {
                    make: "Steinway",
                    color: "black",
                    keys: 88
                 };

                        The object has a property named "keys" that represents the number of
                   keys on the piano. If methods like keys could be called directly on the piano
                   object itself, the property name and method name would conflict, which
                  ­isn’t allowed. JavaScript has many more built-in object methods besides keys,
                 and it would be tedious to have to remember all of their names to make
                 sure they ­don’t conflict with any of your objects’ property names. To avoid
                 this issue, the designers of the language made ­these object methods static.
                 ­They’re attached to the overall Object constructor instead of to individual
                  objects like cat or piano, so ­there’s no possibility of a naming conflict.

       NOTE      None of this is an issue with arrays. Method names must be valid identifiers, mean-
                 ing they ­can’t start with a number. Therefore, t­here’s no way an array method could
                 conflict with the array’s numerical indices.

                 Getting an Object’s Keys and Values
                 To get an array of the keys and values of an object, use Object.entries. This
                 static method returns an array of two-­element arrays, where the first ele­
                 ment of each inner array is a key and the second is its value. ­Here’s how it
                 works:

                 let chromosomes = {
                    koala: 16,
                    snail: 24,
                    giraffe: 30,
                    cat: 38
                 };
                 Object.entries(chromosomes);
                 (4) [Array(2), Array(2), Array(2), Array(2)]

                     We create an object with four key-­value pairs, showing how many chro-
                 mosomes vari­ous animals have. Object.entries(chromosomes) returns an array
                 containing four ele­ments, each of which is a two-­element array. To expand
                 the outer array and view its full contents, click the arrow:

50   Chapter 3
 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


 (4) [Array(2), Array(2), Array(2), Array(2)]
	 0: (2) ['koala', 16]
	 1: (2) ['snail', 24]
	 2: (2) ['giraffe', 30]
	 3: (2) ['cat', 38]
	  length: 4
	 [[Prototype]]: Array(0)

This shows that each inner array contains a key from the original object as
its first ele­ment, and the associated value as its second ele­ment.
      Converting an object into an array with Object.entries makes it easier to
cycle through all of the object’s key-­value pairs and do something with each
one in turn. W ­ e’ll see how to do this with loops in Chapter 4.

Combining Objects
The Object.assign method lets you combine multiple objects into one. For
example, say you have two objects, one giving the physical attributes of a
book and the other describing its contents:

let physical = { pages: 208, binding: "Hardcover" };
let contents = { genre: "Fiction", subgenre: "Mystery" };

    With Object.assign, you can consolidate t­ hese separate objects into one
overall book object:

let book = {};
Object.assign(book, physical, contents);
book;
 {pages: 208, binding: 'Hardcover', genre: 'Fiction', subgenre: 'Mystery'}

     The first argument to Object.assign is the target, the object that the keys
from the other objects are assigned to. In this case, we use an empty object
called book as the target. The remaining arguments are the sources, the
objects whose key-­value pairs are to be copied into the target. You can pass
as many source objects a­ fter the initial target argument as you want—­we’re
just d
     ­ oing two h­ ere. The method mutates and returns the target object
with the key-­value pairs copied from the source objects. The source objects
themselves are untouched.
     You d­ on’t have to create a new, empty object to use as the target for
Object.assign, but if you d­ on’t, you’ll end up modifying one of your source
objects. For example, we could remove the first argument, book, from the
previous call and still get an object with the same four key-­value pairs:

Object.assign(physical, contents);
physical;
 {pages: 208, binding: 'Hardcover', genre: 'Fiction', subgenre: 'Mystery'}

   The prob­lem ­here is that physical is now the target object, so it gets
mutated, gaining all the key-­value pairs from contents. This usually ­isn’t

                                                                 Compound Data Types   51
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                 what you want, as the original, separate objects are often still impor­t ant to
                 other parts of your application. For this reason, it’s common practice to use
                 an empty object as the first argument to Object.assign.


     Nesting Objects and Arrays
                 As with arrays, we can nest objects in other objects. We can also nest objects
                 in arrays, and arrays in objects, to create more sophisticated data struc-
                 tures. For example, you might want to make an object representing a person
                 that contained a children property containing an array of objects represent-
                 ing that person’s c­ hildren. We build ­these nested structures in two ways: by
                 creating an object or array literal with nested object or array literals inside,
                 or by creating the inner ele­ments, saving them to variables, and then build-
                   ing up the composite structures using the variables. ­We’ll examine both of
                 t­ hese techniques h
                                    ­ ere.

                 Nesting with Literals
                 First, let’s build a nested structure using literals. ­We’ll create an array of
                 objects representing dif­fer­ent book trilogies:

                 let trilogies = [
                 1 {
                 		 title: "His Dark Materials",
                 		 author: "Philip Pullman",
                 		 books: ["Northern Lights", "The Subtle Knife", "The Amber Spyglass"]
                    },
                 2 {
                 		 title: "Broken Earth",
                 		 author: "N. K. Jemisin",
                 		 books: ["The Fifth Season", "The Obelisk Gate", "The Stone Sky"]
                    }
                 ];

                     The variable trilogies contains an array of two ele­ments, 1 and 2,
                 each of which is an object with information about a par­tic­u­lar trilogy. Notice
                 that each object has the same keys, since we want to store the same pieces of
                 information about each trilogy. One of ­those keys, books, itself contains an
                 array of strings representing the book titles within the trilogy. We thus have
                 an array within an object within an array.
                     Accessing an ele­ment from one of ­these inner arrays requires a combi-
                 nation of array indexing and object dot notation:

                 trilogies[1].books[0];
                 'The Fifth Season'

                 ­Here, trilogies[1] means we want the second object in the outer array,
                 .books means we want the value of that object’s books key (which is an




52   Chapter 3
 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


array), and [0] means we want the first ele­ment from that array. Putting it
together, we get the first book from the second trilogy in the outer array.

Nesting with Variables
An alternative technique for making nested structures is to create objects
containing the inner ele­ments, assign ­those objects to variables, and then
build the outer structure out of t­ hese variables. For example, say we want to
create a data structure modeling the change in our pocket. We create four
objects representing a penny, nickel, dime, and quarter, assigning each to
its own variable:

let penny = { name: "Penny", value: 1, weight: 2.5 };
let nickel = { name: "Nickel", value: 5, weight: 5 };
let dime = { name: "Dime", value: 10, weight: 2.268 };
let quarter = { name: "Quarter", value: 25, weight: 5.67 };

   Next, we use t­ hese variables to create an array representing the specific
combination of coins in our pocket. For example:

let change = [quarter, quarter, dime, penny, penny, penny];

    Notice that some of the coin objects appear in the array multiple times.
This is one advantage of assigning the inner objects to variables before we
create the outer array: an object can be repeated within the array without
having to manually write out the object literal each time.
    Accessing a value from one of the inner objects again requires a combi-
nation of array indexing and object dot notation:

change[0].value;
25

­Here, change[0] gives us the first ele­ment of the change array (a quarter
 object) and .value gives us its value key.
      An in­ter­est­ing consequence of building the array from object variables
 like this is that the repeated ele­ments share a common identity. For exam-
 ple, change[3] and change[4] refer to the same penny object. If the US govern-
 ment de­cided to update the weight of a penny, we could update the weight
property of the under­lying penny object, and that update would be reflected
in all the penny ele­ments of the change array:

penny.weight = 2.49;
change[3].weight;
2.49
change[4].weight;
2.49
change[5].weight;
2.49




                                                                Compound Data Types   53
                  JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                 ­Here we change the weight property of penny from 2.5 to 2.49. Then we check
                 the weight of each penny in the array, confirming that the update has car-
                  ried over to each one.



                                                 TRY IT YOURSELF


                     3-4.	Try changing the value property of quarter and check to see if that
                           change is reflected in the change array. Now, change the weight of
                           change[0]. Do you see that change reflected in quarter as well?




                 Exploring Nested Objects in the Console
                 The Chrome console makes it easy to explore nested objects, like we did
                 ­earlier in this chapter with the nested ticTacToe array. To illustrate, w
                                                                                          ­ e’ll cre-
                  ate a deeply nested object and try to look inside:

                 let nested = {
                    name: "Outer",
                    content: {
                 		name: "Middle",
                 		content: {
                 			name: "Inner",
                 			content: "Whoa..."
                 		}
                    }
                 };

                     Our nested object contains three layers of objects, each with a name and
                 content property. The value of content for the outer and m
                                                                          ­ iddle layers is
                 another object. Getting the value of the innermost object’s content property
                 requires a long chain of dot notation:

                 nested​.content​.content​.content;
                 'Whoa...'

                 This is equivalent to asking for the content property of the content property
                 of the content property of the outermost object.
                      Now try viewing the value of nested as a w
                                                               ­ hole:

                 nested;
                  {name: 'Outer', content: {...}}

                 The console just gives an abbreviated version with the value of the outer
                 object’s content property shown as {...} to imply that t­ here’s an object ­here
                 but ­there ­isn’t room to display it. Click the arrow to expand the view of the
                 outer object. Now the next nested object (with name: "Middle") is shown in


54   Chapter 3
                 JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                abbreviated form. Click the arrow to expand this object, too, and then one
                more time to expand the object with name: "Inner". You should now see the
                entire content of the object in the console:

                 {name: 'Outer', content: {...}}
                 content:
                		content:
                				content: "Whoa..."
                				name: "Inner"
                			[[Prototype]]: Object
                			name: "Middle"
                		[[Prototype]]: Object
                		name: "Outer"
                 [[Prototype]]: Object

                      The [[Prototype]] properties refer to the Object constructor, which w­ e’ve
                previously used to call object methods like Object.keys and Object.assign.
                ­We’ll discuss prototypes in detail in Chapter 6.
                      Using the console like this to view complex objects is a very helpful
                 debugging tool. You’ll often be working with objects that come from dif­
                 fer­ent JavaScript libraries, or that contain data you fetch from a server,
                and you w  ­ on’t necessarily know the “shape” of the data—­what properties
                 the objects contain, how many levels of nesting they have, and the like.
                 With the console, you can interactively explore the objects and see their
                 contents.

                Printing Nested Objects with JSON.stringify
                Another way to view a nested object is to turn it into a JSON string. JSON,
                or JavaScript Object Notation, is a textual data format based on JavaScript
                object and array literals that’s heavi­ly used across the web and beyond to
                store and exchange information. The JSON.stringify method converts a
                JavaScript object into a JSON string. Let’s pass it the nested object as an
                example:

JSON.stringify(nested);
'{"name":"Outer","content":{"name":"Middle","content":{"name":"Inner","content":"Whoa..."}}}'

                    The result is a string (it’s enclosed in single quotes) containing a JSON
                repre­sen­t a­t ion of the nested object. Essentially, it’s the equivalent of the
                original object literal we used to create nested. Just like JavaScript, JSON
                uses braces to enclose objects, colons to separate keys from values, and
                commas to separate dif­fer­ent key-­value pairs. All that’s missing from this
                repre­sen­t a­t ion are the original line breaks and indentations we used to
                clarify the object literal’s nested structure. To re-­create t­ hose, we can pass
                JSON.stringify another argument representing the number of spaces to
                indent each new nested object:

                nestedJSON = JSON.stringify(nested, null, 2);
                console.log(nestedJSON);


                                                                                 Compound Data Types   55
                     JavaScript Crash Course (Sample Chapter) © 11/6/23 by Nick Morgan


                 {
                   "name": "Outer",
                   "content": {
                 		"name": "Middle",
                 		"content": {
                 			"name": "Inner",
                 			"content": "Whoa..."
                 		}
                   }
                 }

                     The second argument to JSON.stringify lets you define a replacer func-
                 tion that can modify the output by replacing key-­value pairs, but we ­don’t
                 have a need for that ­here, so we pass null. Passing 2 for the third argument
                 modifies the be­hav­ior of JSON.stringify to add newlines a­ fter each prop-
                 erty and ­a fter opening braces and brackets, and then two extra spaces of
                 indentation for each additional level of nesting. If we viewed the result in
                 the console directly, we’d see a bunch of \n escape characters for all the
                 newlines. Instead, we store the result in a variable and pass it to console.log,
                 giving us a well-­formatted view of the object’s nested hierarchy.
                     Calling JSON.stringify in this way is helpful for getting a quick visual
                 repre­sen­t a­t ion of an object without having to repeatedly click the arrows in
                 the console to expand each nested level. The method works on non-­nested
                 objects, too, but in that case the regular view of the object in the console is
                 usually sufficient.


     Summary
                 This chapter introduced you to JavaScript’s compound data types, which
                 allow you to combine multiple values into a single unit. By ­organizing data
                 in this way, you can manipulate unbounded amounts of information more
                 efficiently. You learned about arrays, which are ordered collections of values
                 identified by numerical indices, usually all of the same data type, and about
                 objects, which are collections of key-­value pairs where each key is a string
                 and the values are often of dif­fer­ent data types. ­You’ve seen how arrays are
                 useful for storing lists of similar values, such as a list of prime numbers or
                 a list of programming languages. Meanwhile, objects are useful for collect-
                 ing multiple pieces of information about a single entity, such as information
                 about a par­t ic­u­lar book or movie.




56   Chapter 3
