Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck




                                  14
                   NEWTON’S SECOND LAW



                   Isaac Newton accomplished a lot. Among
                  the numerous physical and mathematical
                 insights he left us are three numbered laws
              that bear his name. Newton’s second law is the
      most important of these; it provides a method for un-
      derstanding the motion of an object if we know the
      forces that act on it. Newton’s third law is almost as
      significant; it’s a rule about how two objects interact.
      Newton’s first law, from a mathematical standpoint,
      is a corollary to Newton’s second law, so it seems the
      smallest of the three. But since Newton’s second law
      is sufficiently intuition shattering, it’s helpful to get
      our minds around something simpler before trying to
      grasp it. Newton’s first law serves well in this capacity;
      it makes a bold claim that seems obviously false.
           In this chapter, we’ll discuss Newton’s first law and then turn our atten-
      tion to Newton’s second law in one linear dimension, such as a horizontal
      line or a vertical line. We’ll show how to think about Newton’s second law
             Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                    in a sequence of settings of increasing complexity, organized by what the
                    forces depend on. We’ll start with constant forces, the simplest situation, be-
                    fore moving on to forces that depend only on time. Then we’ll turn to forces
                    that depend on the velocity of the particle they act on, followed by forces
                    that depend on both time and velocity. The techniques for solving Newton’s
                    second law change as the forces involved depend on different physical quan-
                    tities. We’ll introduce the Euler method for solving a differential equation
                    and explore a number of situations in which Newton’s second law is the cen-
                    tral principle that allows us some traction in understanding the motion of
                    an object.


      Newton’s First Law
                    Let’s return to the air track of Chapter 4. If you give the car a little push on
                    the air track and then let it go, it will travel at a constant speed until it hits
                    the end of the track. After we stop pushing the car, it continues to move at
                    some speed even with no force applied in the direction of motion. This ten-
                    dency for moving objects to keep moving is called inertia. The idea of inertia
                    is relevant in the one-dimensional spatial setting of the air track, and it’s also
                    relevant in the unconstrained three-dimensional spatial setting of the world
                    in which we live. The idea is important enough to be enshrined in a princi-
                    ple of physics called Newton’s first law. Here are three versions:
                            Newton’s first law, Newton’s words [15]
                            Every body perseveres in its state of being at rest or of moving uniformly
                            straight forward, except insofar as it is compelled to change its state by
                            forces impressed.

                            Newton’s first law, poetic version
                            A body in motion stays in motion. A body at rest stays at rest.

                            Newton’s first law, modern version
                            In the absence of applied forces, an object maintains the same velocity.

                         Recall that velocity is a vector, so maintaining the same velocity means
                    keeping the same speed as well as the same direction. Since acceleration
                    is change in velocity per unit of time, an equivalent way of expressing New-
                    ton’s first law is that in the absence of forces, an object experiences no
                    acceleration.
                         Notice that Newton’s first law makes no mention of forces that were ap-
                    plied in the past. The point is that if there are no forces acting now, the veloc-
                    ity will stay constant now. Any time there are no forces present, the velocity
                    will stay constant.
                         Why does Newton’s first law seem obviously false? Because we’re stuck
                    on the surface of the earth, a place that is rife with forces we might fail to
                    consider, friction and air resistance not least among them. Things are a bit
                    simpler out in space. We can imagine one astronaut tossing a small wrench




206    Chapter 14
    Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

          to another at slow speed. The wrench just glides straight across the ship, per-
          haps rotating slowly about its center. That wrench is a great example of New-
          ton’s first law.
              Perhaps you’ve been in a car when the driver slams on the brakes so that
          books, papers, and toys go flying forward (with respect to the car’s seats).
          In my family, we celebrate these moments by shouting “Newton’s first law!”
          From a perspective outside the (decelerating) car, the books, papers, and
          toys are doing their best to travel in a straight line, at least for the short pe-
          riod of time before gravity and other objects put an end to their line-like
          motion.
              Newton’s first law tells us that objects naturally go steady and straight.
          In practice, though, they don’t. Newton’s second law explains how and why.


Newton’s Second Law in One Dimension
          Newton’s first law tells us that when no forces are present, an object does
          not accelerate. Newton’s second law claims that acceleration is caused by
          forces.
                   Newton’s second law, Newton’s words [15]
                   A change in motion is proportional to the motive force impressed and
                   takes place along the straight line in which that force is impressed.

                   Newton’s second law, poetic version
                   An object’s acceleration is directly proportional to the net force acting on
                   the object and inversely proportional to its mass.

               Modern versions of Newton’s second law are expressed by Equation 14.1
          for Newton’s second law in one dimension, and Equation 16.1 for New-
          ton’s second law in three dimensions. In the remainder of this chapter, we’ll
          treat Newton’s second law in one dimension, which allows us to keep things
          simple by using numbers rather than vectors for velocity, acceleration, and
          force. In Chapter 16, we’ll treat Newton’s second law in full generality with
          vectors.
               To discuss force and mass in a quantitative way, we need units of mea-
          sure. In the SI system, force is measured in Newtons (N). A 100-N force has
          a different effect on a golf ball than it has on a bowling ball. According to
          Newton, each object has a mass, which determines the readiness of an object
          to accelerate in response to a force. A large-mass object experiences small ac-
          celeration compared to a small-mass object exposed to the same force. The
          SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg).
               Newton’s second law expresses a relationship between the following
          three quantities:
              •    The forces that act on an object
              •    The mass of the object
              •    The acceleration of the object



                                                                                   Newton’s Second Law   207
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                        Newton’s second law says that the acceleration of an object can be found
                   by dividing the net force acting on the object by the mass of the object. The
                   net force acting on an object is the sum of all the forces acting on the object.
                   In one dimension, some forces may be negative and some may be positive.
                        Newton’s second law is usually written as Fnet = ma. Unlike the one-
                   dimensional equations for velocity and acceleration (Equations 4.5 and 4.12),
                   this equation is not an equality of functions. The acceleration of the object
                   is only a function of time, but the net force generally depends on the time,
                   the position of the object, and the velocity of the object. The net force at
                   time t is Fnet (t, x(t), v(t)). A better way to write Newton’s second law is:

                                       Newton’s second law in one dimension
                                              Fnet (t, x(t), v(t)) = ma(t)                      (14.1)

                        There is a chicken-and-egg issue going on with Newton’s second law. We
                   know from Equations 4.5 and 4.12 that v = Dx and a = Dv. If we know the
                   function a (meaning we know its value at all times), we can find the function
                   v given an initial velocity. (See Equation 6.1 and the corresponding function
                   velFromAcc.) We can then go on and find the function x given an initial po-
                   sition. (See Equation 6.5 and the corresponding function posFromVel.) But
                   Newton’s second law is telling us that acceleration depends on the forces,
                   which depend on the position and the velocity. To find the position of my
                   object, it seems that I need to find the velocity, and for that I need the ac-
                   celeration. However, the acceleration depends on both the position and the
                   velocity.
                        There is a name for this particular kind of chicken-and-egg problem.
                   Newton’s second law is an example of a differential equation. A differential
                   equation is a relationship between derivatives of an unknown function, with
                   the unknown function itself often regarded as the zeroth derivative. The un-
                   known function in the case of Newton’s second law is usually either the po-
                   sition x or the velocity v. Velocity can be written as the first derivative of po-
                   sition (v = Dx), and acceleration can be written as the second derivative of
                   position (a = Dv = D2 x).
                        Newton’s second law looks more like a differential equation if we write it
                   in terms of an unknown position function.

                                               Fnet (t, x(t), Dx(t)) = mD2 x(t)                 (14.2)

                        This is a second-order differential equation because it is a relationship
                   between the position function x, its first derivative Dx, and its second deriva-
                   tive D2 x. The relationship for a particular physical object depends on the func-
                   tion Fnet , which depends on the nature of the forces acting on the object.
                        In simple situations, the net force on an object may not depend on time,
                   position, and velocity, but rather only on zero, one, or two of these physical
                   quantities. In these simple situations, Newton’s second law may appear as
                   something simpler than a second-order differential equation. Table 14-1 lists
                   situations by the physical quantities that the forces depend on and gives the
                   mathematical technique needed to solve Newton’s second law.

208   Chapter 14
    Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

          Table 14-1: The Technique for Solving Newton’s Second Law,
          Based on Which Physical Quantities the Forces Depend On

            Forces depend only on          Solution technique
            Nothing                        Algebra
            Time                           Integration
            Velocity                       First-order differential equation
            Time and velocity              First-order differential equation
            Time, position, and velocity   Second-order differential equation

               A net force that depends on nothing is a constant net force. Its value re-
          mains constant over time, independent of time, position, or velocity. In the
          next several sections, we’ll look at constant forces, forces that depend only
          on time, forces that depend only on velocity, and forces that depend on
          both time and velocity. This restriction allows us to limit our attention in
          this chapter to first-order differential equations. In Chapter 15, we’ll look at
          the more general case of one-dimensional motion in which the net force can
          depend on time, position, and velocity.

Second Law with Constant Forces
          The simplest situation for Newton’s second law is when the net force is con-
          stant, independent of time, position, and velocity. Most problems in an in-
          troductory physics course are like this because they can be solved without
          differential equations and without a computer.
               Let’s consider an example problem with constant forces.
          Example 14.1. Suppose we have a car with mass 0.1 kg on an air track. The
          car is initially moving east at a speed of 0.6 m/s. Starting at time t = 0, we
          apply to this car a constant force of 0.04 N to the east. At the same time, our
          friend applies to the same car a constant force of 0.08 N to the west. What
          will the subsequent motion of the car look like? In particular, how will the
          velocity and the position of the car change in time?
               Figure 14-1 shows the schematic diagram.


                   F cnet


                        F cnet :: R

                       /m

                              R                          R
           a(t) :: R                   v(t) :: R                  x(t) :: R
                                R                        R

          Figure 14-1: Schematic diagram for Newton’s second law with
          constant forces
                                                                                Newton’s Second Law   209
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                        The constant net force F cnet (superscript c for constant) acting on the
                   object needs to be divided by the mass of the object to obtain the accelera-
                   tion of the object. Because the net force is constant, the acceleration is also
                   constant.
                                                              F cnet
                                                       a(t) =                                 (14.3)
                                                                m
                        We write a(t) rather than a for acceleration, not because acceleration
                   changes with time, but because a is the acceleration function (type R -> R)
                   and a(t) is the acceleration (type R). We then integrate acceleration to obtain
                   the velocity.
                                                                  F cnet t
                                                   v(t) = v(0) +                              (14.4)
                                                                     m
                        The integrator that produces velocity contains a real number (type R)
                   as state. This type is shown below the integrator in Figure 14-1. This inte-
                   grator remembers the current velocity so that it can be updated using the
                   acceleration.
                        We then integrate the velocity to obtain the position.

                                                                       F cnet t2
                                               x(t) = x(0) + v(0)t +                            (14.5)
                                                                          2m
                        The wires of the diagram represent quantities that are continuously
                   changing in time. Each wire in the diagram is labeled with a name and a
                   type. For this diagram, all of the wire types are real numbers.
                        Rectangular boxes represent purely functional constants and functions.
                   In other words, they are constants and functions that do not contain any
                   state, so that the output is a function only of the input. The circular integra-
                   tors contain states that must be combined with the input to produce the out-
                   put. The integrators are labeled with the type of state they contain, which is
                   the same as the type of the output from the integrator.
                        Before we write Haskell code to solve Newton’s second law for constant
                   forces, we are going to write a few lines of code that need to be at the top of
                   the source code file we build throughout this chapter. The first line turns
                   on warnings, which I recommend doing because the compiler will warn you
                   of things that are legal but unusual enough that they may not be what you
                   intended. The second line gives the code in this chapter the module name
                   Newton2. If we want to use functions we write here in later chapters, we’ll refer
                   to the current code using its module name. A module name is optional, but
                   if you use one, it must match the filename; in this case, the filename should
                   be Newton2.hs. The third line loads the gnuplot graphics library so that we
                   can make a graph. Imports like this must occur before any function defini-
                   tions or type signatures.

                   {-# OPTIONS -Wall #-}

                   module Newton2 where

                   import Graphics.Gnuplot.Simple


210   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

           Example 14.1 is typical of situations in which Newton’s second law ap-
      plies. Given a mass, an initial velocity, and some forces, we are asked to pro-
      duce velocity as a function of time. In the Haskell language, a solution to
      this example situation would be a (higher-order) function velocityCF (CF for
      constant forces) with the following type:

      velocityCF :: Mass
                 -> Velocity             -- initial velocity
                 -> [Force]              -- list of forces
                 -> Time -> Velocity     -- velocity function

           Recall that there are (at least) two ways to read this type signature. On
      one reading, velocityCF takes four inputs—mass, initial velocity, a list of forces,
      and a time—and produces as output a real number representing velocity. An
      alternative reading is that velocityCF takes three inputs—mass, initial velocity,
      and a list of forces—and produces as output a function for how velocity changes
      with time. If we wanted to emphasize the latter viewpoint, we could write

      velocityCF :: Mass -> Velocity -> [Force] -> (Time -> Velocity)

      but it means the same thing as the original type signature.
          We used the types Time, Mass, Velocity, and Force. These are not built-in
      types in Haskell, so we’d better define what they mean. In one-dimensional
      mechanics, all of these quantities can be represented with real numbers, so
      we can write some type synonyms to define these types. Using a type syn-
      onym in which R stands for Double,

      type R = Double

      we can write type synonyms for all of the other types:

      type Mass     = R
      type Time     = R
      type Position = R
      type Velocity = R
      type Force    = R

           The definitions for types Mass, Time, and so on, need not appear before
      their use in a type signature. Haskell allows definitions of constants, func-
      tions, and types before or after their use.
           If we can write a function velocityCF with the type signature above, we
      will have solved not just Example 14.1, but all others like it. Our strategy in
      writing such a function is:
          •    Find the net force by adding all of the forces
          •    Find the acceleration using Newton’s second law (Equation 14.3)
          •    Find the velocity from the acceleration (Equation 4.14 or 14.4)
          Here’s a definition for velocityCF that expresses these three steps and
      has the type we claimed earlier.

                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   211
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck


                   velocityCF m v0 fs
                       = let fNet = sum fs      -- net force
                              a0  = fNet / m    -- Newton's second law
                              v t = v0 + a0 * t -- constant acceleration eqn
                         in v

                        To write the function velocityCF, we begin by naming the three inputs:
                   mass m, initial velocity v0, and list of forces fs. We then use a let construction
                   to define three local names for net force, acceleration, and velocity. To find
                   the net force, we sum up the forces in the list using the built-in sum function.
                   To find the acceleration, we divide the net force on the object by the mass of
                   the object, as Newton’s second law prescribes.
                        The third equation in the let construction defines a local function v
                   to represent the velocity function. We use Equation 4.14, one of the con-
                   stant acceleration equations introduced in standard introductory physics
                   textbooks, but we could just as easily have used Equation 14.4 in place of the
                   second and third lines of the let construction. Notice that we have written
                   the definition of velocityCF using the “three-input thinking” mentioned ear-
                   lier. Exercise 14.1 asks you to rewrite the function using four-input thinking.
                        We can write a function positionCF that produces a position function
                   given mass, initial position, initial velocity, and a list of constant forces.

                   positionCF :: Mass
                               -> Position         -- initial position
                               -> Velocity         -- initial velocity
                               -> [Force]          -- list of forces
                               -> Time -> Position -- position function
                   positionCF m x0 v0 fs
                       = let fNet = sum fs
                              a0   = fNet / m
                              x t = x0 + v0 * t + a0*t**2 / 2
                         in x

                       Here, we have used Equation 4.15 or 14.5. Returning to Example 14.1,
                   the velocity of the car as a function of time is

                   velocityCF 0.1 0.6 [0.04, -0.08]

                   because 0.1 kg is the mass of the car, 0.6 m/s is its initial velocity, and the
                   square-bracketed list contains the forces in Newtons. We can ask for the type
                   of this function in GHCi, and we can ask for values of the velocity at speci-
                   fic times.

                   Prelude> :l Newton2
                   [1 of 1] Compiling Newton2          ( Newton2.hs, interpreted )
                   Ok, one module loaded.
                   *Newton2> :t velocityCF 0.1 0.6 [0.04, -0.08]
                   velocityCF 0.1 0.6 [0.04, -0.08] :: Time -> Velocity
                   *Newton2> velocityCF 0.1 0.6 [0.04, -0.08] 0

212   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

      0.6
      *Newton2> velocityCF 0.1 0.6 [0.04, -0.08] 1
      0.2

          Since we have the velocity function in hand, we can graph it. Let’s write
      the code to do so first. Most of the code below is for setting up a title, axis
      labels, and the name of the file we want produced. The interesting stuff is at
      the end, where we give a list of times at which to evaluate the function and
      the function itself.

      carGraph :: IO ()
      carGraph
          = plotFunc [Title "Car on an air track"
                     ,XLabel "Time (s)"
                     ,YLabel "Velocity of Car (m/s)"
                     ,PNG "CarVelocity.png"
                     ,Key Nothing
                     ] [0..4 :: Time] (velocityCF 0.1 0.6 [0.04, -0.08])

           This code produces the graph in Figure 14-2.




      Figure 14-2: Car velocity as a function of time in Example 14.1

           If you load this chapter’s module, Newton2, into GHCi and enter carGraph,

      *Newton2> carGraph

      you will not get any return value, but the function will produce a Portable
      Network Graphics (PNG) file named CarVelocity.png on your hard drive.
      Without the PNG "CarVelocity.png" option, the carGraph function would pro-
      duce a graph on the screen.
          Note that the negative acceleration in the graph in Figure 14-2 (which
      exists over the entire time interval from t = 0 to t = 4 s) does not mean that

                                                                        Newton’s Second Law   213
             Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                    the car is always slowing down. Rather, a negative acceleration means an ac-
                    celeration to the west. The car slows down during the first 1.5 s as it is mov-
                    ing east but then begins to speed up as it moves west. When the acceleration
                    and velocity of an object point in the same direction, the object speeds up.
                    When the acceleration and velocity of an object point in opposite directions,
                    the object slows down.
                        With the functions velocityCF and positionCF, we have general-purpose
                    ways of solving any Newton’s second law type problem in one spatial dimen-
                    sion with constant forces. Next we’ll consider forces that change in time.


      Second Law with Forces that Depend Only on Time
                    The next situation for Newton’s second law is when the net force depends
                    on time but not on position or velocity. Figure 14-3 shows a schematic dia-
                    gram for Newton’s second law with forces that depend only on time.

                                              t :: R           R            1 :: R

                                                               R


                                       t
                                     F net


                                           t (t) :: R
                                         F net


                                      /m

                                                R                            R
                             a(t) :: R                     v(t) :: R                   x(t) :: R
                                                R                             R


                    Figure 14-3: Schematic diagram for Newton’s second law with forces that depend only
                    on time

                         The constant number 1 is fed into an integrator to produce a value for
                    time. (The time changes at a rate of 1 second per second.) As usual, wires
                    are labeled with names and types. Integrators are labeled with the type of
                                                                               t (superscript t for
                    state they hold. Time is fed into the net force function F net
                    time-dependent), which produces net force as output. To obtain the accel-
                    eration of the object, we need to divide the net force acting on the object by
                    the object’s mass.
                                                            F tnet (t)
                                                     a(t) =                                  (14.6)
                                                                m


214    Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

           We then integrate the acceleration to obtain the velocity,
                                   Z t                    Z
                                                         1 t t
                     v(t) = v(0) +        0    0
                                       a(t ) dt = v(0) +     F net (t0 ) dt0                    (14.7)
                                    0                    m 0
      and we integrate the velocity to obtain the position:
                                    Z t
                      x(t) = x(0) +     v(t00 ) dt00
                                     0
                                    Z t"              Z 00                #
                                                     1 t t
                           = x(0) +      v(0) +            F net (t ) dt dt00
                                                                   0    0
                                     0              m 0
                                                 Z "Z t00                   #
                                              1 t
                           = x(0) + v(0)t +                 F net (t ) dt dt00
                                                              t      0    0
                                              m 0      0

          The wires of the diagram represent quantities that are continuously
      changing in time. Rectangular boxes represent pure functions, whereas cir-
      cular elements contain state.
          To solve Newton’s second law problems with forces that depend on
      time, we’d like a higher-order function that produces a velocity function,
      similar to velocityCF in the previous section. One difference is that now we
      need to provide a list of force functions rather than a list of numerical forces.
      We want a function velocityFt (the Ft suffix denotes that forces depend only
      on time) with the following type signature:

      velocityFt :: Mass -> Velocity -> [Time -> Force] -> Time -> Velocity

          Given the mass of our object, its initial velocity, and a list of force func-
      tions, we want to produce a velocity function.
          Because we’re going to do numerical integration to get the velocity func-
      tion, we’ll add one additional parameter to this type signature, namely the
      time step for numerical integration. Thus, we arrive at the following defini-
      tion for velocityFt:

      velocityFt :: R                 -- dt for integral
                 -> Mass
                 -> Velocity          -- initial velocity
                 -> [Time -> Force]   -- list of force functions
                 -> Time -> Velocity -- velocity function
      velocityFt dt m v0 fs
          = let fNet t = sum [f t | f <- fs]
                a t = fNet t / m
            in antiDerivative dt v0 a

          In this definition, we begin by naming the inputs: dt for an integration
      time step, m for the mass of the object we are attending to, v0 for the initial
      velocity of this object, and fs for a list of force functions. Note that the local
      variable for forces, fs, had type [Force] (or [R]) when used in velocityCF and
      positionCF for situations with constant forces, but it now has type [Time ->
      Force] (or [R -> R]) for situations with forces that depend on time.

                                                                          Newton’s Second Law     215
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                        We again use a let construction to define local functions, a net force
                   function, and an acceleration function. The net force function adds to-
                   gether the forces provided in the list fs. We might have hoped we could use
                   the same line of code we used in velocityCF, namely fNet = sum fs, to sum
                   the forces. After all, fs is still a list. The trouble is that sum works only with
                   types that are instances of Num, as you can see if you look at the type of sum.
                   So while it is happy to add numbers (type R), it is not happy to add functions
                   (type R -> R). Fortunately, we can evaluate the force functions at a time t in-
                   troduced as an argument to fNet and then add the resulting numbers.
                        The acceleration function comes from Newton’s second law. Here, we
                   might have hoped that we could divide the net force function by the mass
                   to obtain the acceleration function, perhaps writing a = fNet / m. But re-
                   call that the division operator insists that it work with two values that have
                   the same type and that this type be an instance of Fractional. The division
                   operator does not want to work with functions. Again, we address this by
                   evaluating the fNet function at the time t introduced as the argument to the
                   acceleration function a.
                        Finally, the velocity comes from taking an antiderivative of the accel-
                   eration function. We defined the functions antiDerivative and integral in
                   Chapter 6, but we’ll repeat their definitions here:

                   antiDerivative :: R -> R -> (R -> R) -> (R -> R)
                   antiDerivative dt v0 a t = v0 + integral dt a 0 t

                   integral :: R -> (R -> R) -> R -> R -> R
                   integral dt f a b
                       = sum [f t * dt | t <- [a+dt/2, a+3*dt/2 .. b - dt/2]]

                        Note that velocityFt dt m v0 fs has type R -> R and is the velocity func-
                   tion for an object with mass m, initial velocity v0, and list of force functions
                   fs. This velocity function is part of the solution to the mechanics problem.
                   Another part of the solution is a position function. We can write a function
                   positionFt that produces a position function given mass, initial position, ini-
                   tial velocity, and a list of force functions.

                   positionFt :: R                 -- dt for integral
                              -> Mass
                              -> Position          -- initial position
                              -> Velocity          -- initial velocity
                              -> [Time -> Force]   -- list of force functions
                              -> Time -> Position -- position function
                   positionFt dt m x0 v0 fs
                       = antiDerivative dt x0 (velocityFt dt m v0 fs)

                       This function works by taking an antiderivative of the velocity function,
                   which we find using velocityFt.
                       As an example of solving Newton’s second law with a time-dependent
                   force, consider a child riding a bike. By working the pedals, the child ar-
                   ranges for the ground to apply a constant forward force of 10 N on the bike

216   Chapter 14
           f14004
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

      for 10 seconds, after which the child coasts for the next 10 seconds. Follow-
      ing the coasting, the child returns to the 10-N force for another 10 seconds,
      and so on, as illustrated in Figure 14-4.

                                   Child pedaling then coasting

                          10


                           8




      Force on bike (N)
                           6


                           4


                           2


                           0
                               0    10         20         30      40
                                             Time(s)

      Figure 14-4: Force as a function of time for a child on a bike

          In this example, we’ll assume that air resistance is not important and
      that there is only one force on the bike.
          Here is the equation for the time-dependent force of pedaling and
      coasting:
                 
                  10 N,        (20 s)n ≤ t < (20 s)n + 10 s for some integer n
       Fpc (t) =                                                               (14.8)
                   0 N, (20 s)n + 10 s ≤ t < (20 s)n + 20 s for some integer n

          The force is either 0 N or 10 N, depending on where the time falls in
      a 20-second cycle. If the time falls in the first 10 seconds of the cycle, the
      force is 10 N. If, on the other hand, the time falls in the last 10 seconds of
      the cycle, the force is 0 N.
          Here is the time-dependent force of Equation 14.8 in Haskell:

      pedalCoast :: Time -> Force
      pedalCoast t
          = let tCycle = 20
                nComplete :: Int
                nComplete = truncate (t / tCycle)
                remainder = t - fromIntegral nComplete * tCycle
            in if remainder < 10
               then 10
               else 0

          The local variable tCycle is the number of seconds for a full cycle. The
      variable nComplete uses the Prelude function truncate to calculate the number
      of complete cycles from the time t. The truncate function produces a type

                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   217
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                   with type class Integral (recall Integer and Int are instances of Integral). We
                   provide a local type signature to say that we want nComplete to have type Int.
                   The local type signature is optional, but the compiler will give us a warning
                   that it chose a default type if we don’t specify something. Remove the local
                   type signature to see what the warning looks like. This is a mild warning. We
                   don’t mind that the compiler chooses Integer instead of Int. You can feel
                   free to ignore this warning and use the code without the type signature if
                   you wish.
                       The remainder is the number of seconds, between 0 and 20, that have
                   elapsed since the beginning of the most recent cycle. We want remainder to
                   be a real number, so we must use fromIntegral to convert nComplete :: Int into
                   a real number.
                       Figure 14-5 shows the position of the child as a function of time.




                   Figure 14-5: Position as a function of time for the child on a bike
                        Here is the Haskell code that produced Figure 14-5:

                   childGraph :: IO ()
                   childGraph
                       = plotFunc [Title "Child pedaling then coasting"
                                  ,XLabel "Time (s)"
                                  ,YLabel "Position of Bike (m)"
                                  ,PNG "ChildPosition.png"
                                  ,Key Nothing
                                  ] [0..40 :: R] (positionFt 0.1 20 0 0 [pedalCoast])

                         The most interesting part of the code is the last line, where we specify the
                   function we want plotted. This function, positionFt 0.1 20 0 0 [pedalCoast],
                   uses the positionFt function we developed earlier in the chapter with a time
                   step of 0.1 s, a mass of 20 kg, 0s for initial position and initial velocity, and a
                   list of forces that includes only the force of pedaling and coasting. All of the

218   Chapter 14
    Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

          relevant physical information is included in the “name” of the function we
          are plotting.
              You can see from the graph in Figure 14-5 that during the first 10 sec-
          onds, the child’s position curve is parabolic, as we’d expect from constant
          acceleration. From 10 to 20 seconds, the position shows constant velocity
          while the child is coasting. From 20 to 30 seconds, there is another period
          of acceleration in which the position curve is parabolic, followed by a second
          period of coasting.
              With the functions velocityFt and positionFt, we have general-purpose
          ways of solving any Newton’s second law type problem in one spatial dimen-
          sion with forces that depend only on time. We’re now ready to look at forces
          that depend on velocity, the most common of which is air resistance.


Air Resistance
          In this section, we’ll make a short diversion from our path of considering
          Newton’s second law in the presence of forces that depend on time, velocity,
          neither, or both to develop an expression for the force of air resistance on
          an object in one-dimensional motion. Air resistance is a force that depends
          only on velocity, and we’ll use it in the next several sections as we develop
          ways to solve Newton’s second law with forces that depend on velocity.
               Introductory physics classes typically ignore air resistance or treat it very
          lightly, because the presence of air resistance turns Newton’s second law
          into a differential equation, which is considered beyond the scope of an in-
          troductory physics course. In this chapter and the next, we’ll develop numer-
          ical methods for solving differential equations, meaning that air resistance is
          not something we want to avoid; in fact, it showcases the power of our tools.
               To develop a model of air resistance, let’s think of the interaction be-
          tween an object and the air around it as a collision. Suppose the object is
          moving with velocity v. In this section, v represents the real-valued, one-
          dimensional velocity of the object (a quantity with type R) and not the ve-
          locity function or the speed.
               Let the cross-sectional area of the object be A and the density of air be ρ.
          We analyze the motion of the object over a small time interval dt. We assume
          that the initial velocity of the air is 0, and that the final velocity of the air is
          v (in other words, after the collision, the air is traveling at the same speed as
          the object).
               The distance the object travels in time dt is v dt. The volume of air swept
          out by the object in time dt is Av dt. The mass of air disturbed by the object
          in time dt is ρAv dt. The momentum imparted to the air by the object in time
          dt is the product of the mass of the air, ρAv dt, and the change in velocity of
          the air, which is v, as we assume that the air starts from rest and ends the
          short time interval with velocity v. The momentum imparted to the air is
          ρAv2 dt. The force felt by the air is this change in momentum per unit time,
          or ρAv2 . The force felt by the object from the air is equal and opposite to
          this following Newton’s third law, which we will discuss in Chapter 19.



                                                                           Newton’s Second Law   219
             Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                         Our derivation was really quite approximate because we don’t know that
                    the air molecules really end up with velocity v, and we haven’t even tried to
                    account for the forces of air molecules on each other as the air compresses.
                    Nevertheless, the form of our result is quite useful and approximately cor-
                    rect. Objects with different shapes respond a bit differently though, so it
                    is useful to introduce a drag coefficient C to account for these differences.
                    The drag coefficient is a dimensionless constant that is a property of the ob-
                    ject that is flying through the air. It is also conventional to include a factor
                    of 1/2 so that the magnitude of the force of air resistance on the object is
                    CρAv2 /2. This expression is never negative. We would prefer an expression
                    in which the force is negative when the velocity is positive and positive when
                    the velocity is negative. Our final expression for the one-dimensional force
                    of air resistance is
                                                               1
                                                  Fair (v) = – CρA v v                           (14.9)
                                                               2
                    where the minus sign and the absolute value ensure that the force acts in a
                    direction opposite the velocity. Air resistance is acting to slow the object. In
                    Haskell, we’ll write Equation 14.9 for air resistance as follows:

                    fAir :: R -- drag coefficient
                         -> R -- air density
                         -> R -- cross-sectional area of object
                         -> Velocity
                         -> Force
                    fAir drag rho area v = -drag * rho * area * abs v * v / 2

                         In the mathematical notation of Equation 14.9, we’re treating Fair as a
                    function of one variable. The parameters C, ρ, and A are not listed explic-
                    itly as variables that Fair depends on. Eliding parameters like this is stan-
                    dard practice in physics, but in some sense it’s an abuse of notation. In the
                    Haskell notation, we must include all of the variables that the force of air re-
                    sistance depends on. We list the three parameters first, before the Velocity,
                    so that an expression like fAir 1 1.225 0.6 is a fully legitimate function that
                    takes only velocity as input. The function fAir 1 1.225 0.6 has already chosen
                    drag = 1, rho = 1.225, and area = 0.6.
                         With this brief foray into air resistance, and particularly the develop-
                    ment of Equation 14.9, we’re now ready to look at Newton’s second law in
                    the case where forces on our object depend only on its velocity.


      Second Law with Forces that Depend Only on Velocity
                    The next situation for Newton’s second law is when the net force depends
                    on velocity but not on time or position. What we really mean here is that the
                    forces do not depend explicitly on time. Velocity is a function that depends
                    on time, and forces are allowed to depend on the velocity in this section, so
                    there is a sense in which the forces depend on time. The constraint in this
                    section is that the forces can depend on time only through the velocity.


220    Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

          The force functions may depend only on one variable, the velocity. We
      use F vj to denote the jth force function of one variable that gives force when
      supplied with velocity and we use F vnet to denote the function of one vari-
      able that gives net force when supplied with velocity.
                                                    X
                                     F vnet (v0 ) =   F vj(v0 )
                                                   j
          We use v0 as a local variable for velocity (type R) rather than v in this sec-
      tion because we want v to stand for the velocity function of our object (type
      R -> R).
          Figure 14-6 shows a schematic diagram for Newton’s second law with
      forces that depend only on velocity.




                       F vnet



       F vnet (v(t)) :: R


                        /m

                                R                             R
              a(t) :: R                    v(t) :: R                    x(t) :: R
                                 R                             R

      Figure 14-6: Newton’s second law with forces that depend only on velocity

           This diagram, unlike previous diagrams, contains a loop. The velocity
      produced by the integrator of acceleration serves as the input to the net
      force function. The loop in the diagram indicates that Newton’s second law
      produces a differential equation. Because the loop contains one integrator,
      we get a first-order differential equation. A differential equation is a more
      difficult mathematical problem than a mere integral or antiderivative, as we
      had when forces depended only on time.
           Newton’s second law is given by the following equation:

                                     d   1X v
                                        v(t) =   F j (v(t))                              (14.10)
                                     dt        m
                                                       j

           The information this equation represents is the same as the information
      in the schematic diagram of Figure 14-6. The equation describes how the
      rate of change of velocity depends on velocity itself through the forces that
      act on the object. The function newtonSecondV, presented next, is yet a third
      way to express Newton’s second law; this function returns the rate of change

                                                                        Newton’s Second Law   221
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                   of velocity when given the current value of velocity along with the forces that
                   act on the object.

                   newtonSecondV :: Mass
                                 -> [Velocity -> Force] -- list of force functions
                                 -> Velocity             -- current velocity
                                 -> R                    -- derivative of velocity
                   newtonSecondV m fs v0 = sum [f v0 | f <- fs] / m

                       We can integrate the acceleration to obtain the velocity.
                                                  Z t                             Z t
                                                                              1
                                  v(t) = v(0) +         a(t0 ) dt0 = v(0) +             F vnet (v(t0 )) dt0
                                                   0                          m    0

                        Unlike the case with time-dependent forces, we cannot simply perform
                   the integral here because the velocity function we are trying to find appears
                   under the integral. How to proceed?
                        To solve the differential equation, Equation 14.10, we will discretize
                   time, which is something we have been doing with our numerical deriva-
                   tives and integrals when we chose a time step. As long as our time step ∆t
                   is smaller than any important time scales in the situation we are addressing,
                   the slope of the line connecting points (t, v(t)) and (t + ∆t, v(t + ∆t)) will be
                   approximately equal to the derivative of velocity at time t.

                                                    v(t + ∆t) – v(t)   dv(t)
                                                                     ≈
                                                          ∆t            dt
                       Rearranging this equation leads to the Euler method for solving a first-
                   order differential equation.
                                                                          dv(t)
                                                  v(t + ∆t) ≈ v(t) +            ∆t                            (14.11)
                                                                           dt
                        The Euler method approximates the velocity at t + ∆t by the sum of the
                   velocity at t and the product of the derivative at t with the time step ∆t. The
                   Euler method gives a way to find velocity at a later time from velocity at an
                   earlier time if we know the derivative of velocity at the earlier time.
                        Figure 14-7 pictorially describes the Euler method for solving Newton’s
                   second law.




222   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck




                   F vnet           F vnet            F vnet            F vnet


                    /m               /m                /m                /m

              ∆t               ∆t                ∆t                ∆t
                    ×                ×                 ×                 ×


                   ×                ×                 ×                 ×
          v(0)              v(∆t)            v(2∆t)            v(3∆t)            v(4∆t)

      Figure 14-7: Euler method for Newton’s second law in one dimension, for the
      special case in which net force depends only on velocity

           The diagram shows how data is acted on by pure functions to compute
      the velocity of the object at different times. Because the diagram employs
      only pure functions (functions that do nothing but return an output from
      inputs and unchanging global values), we refer to this as a functional diagram.
      Whereas the schematic diagram in Figure 14-6 presents time as continuous,
      this diagram shows time as discrete. And whereas the schematic diagram has
      wires with values that are continuously changing in time, the functional dia-
      gram has wires with values that do not change. Different points in time have
      different wires in the functional diagram. While a schematic diagram may
      contain the stateful integrator from Figure 6-5, a functional diagram uncoils
      and replaces the integrator with a discrete, functional model like the one in
      Figure 6-7. We can see from Figure 14-7 that the same set of computations
      occurs at each time step to produce a new velocity from an old velocity. We
      call the set of computations that occurs at each time step the velocity-update
      function.
           Figure 14-8 shows the velocity-update function, which is based on the
      application of the Euler method to one small time step.




                                                                           Newton’s Second Law   223
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck




                                F vnet


                                 /m

                           ∆t
                                 ×


                                ×
                    v(t)                 v(t + ∆t)

                   Figure 14-8: Velocity-update function
                   used in the Euler method for solving
                   Newton’s second law with forces
                   that depend only on velocity

                       Figure 14-8 shows a functional diagram for velocity update, visually de-
                   scribing how velocity at t + ∆t is computed from velocity at t and the forces.
                       Here is the velocity-update equation showing how a new velocity is ob-
                   tained from an old velocity:
                                                                     F vnet (v(t))
                                                v(t + ∆t) = v(t) +                 ∆t           (14.12)
                                                                          m
                       Lastly, we have the Haskell function updateVelocity, which advances the
                   value of the velocity by one time step.

                   updateVelocity :: R                     -- time interval dt
                                  -> Mass
                                  -> [Velocity -> Force] -- list of force functions
                                  -> Velocity              -- current velocity
                                  -> Velocity              -- new velocity
                   updateVelocity dt m fs v0
                       = v0 + (newtonSecondV m fs v0) * dt

                       The functional diagram in Figure 14-8, the velocity-update equation
                   (Equation 14.12), and the function updateVelocity express the same informa-
                   tion in different forms, namely how to take one step in time with the Euler
                   method.
                       Now we want to write a function velocityFv, similar to velocityCF and
                   velocityFt, but for the case of forces that depend on velocity. To think of
                   updateVelocity as a function that takes Velocity as input and gives Velocity as
                   output, we want to think of the time step, mass, and list of force functions as
                   parameters. The function updateVelocity dt m fs has type Velocity -> Velocity
                   and plays the role of the iterable function f in Figure 6-4 on page 76.

                   velocityFv :: R                         -- time step
                              -> Mass

224   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                 -> Velocity             -- initial velocity v(0)
                 -> [Velocity -> Force] -- list of force functions
                 -> Time -> Velocity     -- velocity function
      velocityFv dt m v0 fs t
          = let numSteps = abs $ round (t / dt)
            in iterate (updateVelocity dt m fs) v0 !! numSteps

           We define a local variable numSteps to be the number of time steps we
      need to take to get as close as possible to the desired time t. We iterate the
      function updateVelocity dt m fs, starting at the initial velocity v0, and then
      select the single value of velocity from this infinite list that is closest to the
      desired time.
           As an example of a situation with forces that depend only on velocity,
      let’s consider a bicycle rider heading north on a flat, level road. We’ll con-
      sider two forces in this situation. First, there is the northward force that
      the road exerts on the tires of the bicycle because the rider is working the
      pedals. Let us call this force Frider (it is directly produced by the road on the
      bike, but it is indirectly produced by the rider), and assume that this force is
      a constant 100 N. Second, there is the southward force of air resistance that
      impedes the northward progress of the rider, especially when she is travel-
      ing quickly. We’ll use the expression for air resistance that we developed in
      the previous section with Equation 14.9. The net force is
                                F vnet (v0 ) = Frider + Fair (v0 )
                                                        1
                                             = Frider – CρA v0 v0
                                                        2
          Let’s take the mass of the bike plus rider to be m = 70 kg. We’ll choose a
      drag coefficient of C = 2, take the density of air to be ρ = 1.225 kg/m3 , and
      approximate the cross-sectional area of bike and rider to be 0.6 m2 . Starting
      from rest, our mission is to find the velocity of the bike as a function of time.
          Before we use our Haskell functions to investigate the motion of the
      bike, we’re going to show how to use the Euler method by hand.


      Euler Method by Hand
      Let’s use the Euler method by hand to compute the first several values of
      velocity for the bike. The purpose in doing this is to get a clear understand-
      ing of what is happening in the Euler method, so the code we write will be
      meaningful and not just a formal representation of some abstract vague pro-
      cess. We choose a time step of 0.5 s. Our mission is to complete the follow-
      ing table. We can fill in all of the time values because they are simply spaced
      at 0.5 s intervals. The initial velocity is 0, so we fill that in as well.

                                          t (s)   v(t) (m/s)
                                          0.0     0.0000
                                          0.5
                                          1.0
                                          1.5

                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   225
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                        We will complete the table by using Equation 14.12 to update the veloc-
                   ity over and over again. To compute the velocity at 0.5 s, we choose t = 0 in
                   Equation 14.12.

                                                      F vnet (v(0.0 s))(0.5 s)
                                   v(0.5 s) = v(0.0 s) +
                                                                70 kg
                                                            F vnet (0.0000 m/s)(0.5 s)
                                            = 0.0000 m/s +
                                                                        70 kg
                                                            (100 N)(0.5 s)
                                            = 0.0000 m/s +
                                                                  70 kg
                                            = 0.7143 m/s

                       We update the table with

                                                      t (s)   v(t) (m/s)
                                                      0.0     0.0000
                                                      0.5     0.7143
                                                      1.0
                                                      1.5

                   and then we calculate v(1.0 s) using Equation 14.12 with t = 0.5 s:

                                         F vnet (v(0.5 s))(0.5 s)
                       v(1.0 s) = v(0.5 s) +
                                                    70 kg
                                                  v
                                               F net (0.7143 m/s)(0.5 s)
                               = 0.7413 m/s +
                                                          70 kg
                               = 0.7413 m/s
                                       [100 N – (1)(1.225 kg/m3 )(0.6 m2 )(0.7143 m/s)2 ](0.5 s)
                                   +
                                                               70 kg
                               = 1.4259 m/s

                       We add this to the appropriate row of the table and continue.

                                         F vnet (v(1.0 s))(0.5 s)
                       v(1.5 s) = v(1.0 s) +
                                                   70 kg
                                               F vnet (1.4259 m/s)(0.5 s)
                               = 1.4259 m/s +
                                                           70 kg
                               = 1.4259 m/s
                                       [100 N – (1)(1.225 kg/m3 )(0.6 m2 )(1.4259 m/s)2 ](0.5 s)
                                   +
                                                               70 kg
                               = 2.1295 m/s




226   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

           The completed table looks like this:


                                          t (s)   v(t) (m/s)
                                          0.0     0.0000
                                          0.5     0.7143
                                          1.0     1.4259
                                          1.5     2.1295


      Euler Method in Haskell
      Now we’ll use the velocityFv function to calculate velocity for the bike. Here
      is a velocity function for the bike with a time step of 1 s:

      bikeVelocity :: Time -> Velocity
      bikeVelocity = velocityFv 1 70 0 [const 100,fAir 2 1.225 0.6]

          The higher-order function const can be used to make a constant func-
      tion. The function const 100 takes one input, ignores it, and returns 100 as
      output. It is equivalent to the anonymous function \_ -> 100. We’re using it
      here to represent the constant force of 100 N.
          Notice the data that must be supplied to solve the bike problem. We
      provide the 70-kg mass, the 0 m/s initial velocity of the bike, and the two
      forces: const 100, a constant force of 100 N, and fAir 2 1.225 0.6, which is
      the force of air resistance with a drag coefficient of 2, an air density of
      1.225 kg/m3 , and a cross-sectional area of 0.6 m2 .
          Here is the code to produce a graph of velocity versus time:

      bikeGraph :: IO ()
      bikeGraph = plotFunc [Title "Bike velocity"
                           ,XLabel "Time (s)"
                           ,YLabel "Velocity of Bike (m/s)"
                           ,PNG "BikeVelocity1.png"
                           ,Key Nothing
                           ] [0,0.5..60] bikeVelocity

          The code plots the bikeVelocity function, including a title and axis labels,
      and makes a PNG file that can be included in another document. Figure 14-9
      contains the graph itself.




                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   227
             Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck




                    Figure 14-9: Bike velocity as a function of time. The stair-stepping look
                    can be fixed and is discussed in the text.

                        A phenomenon occurs in Figure 14-9 that does not occur in constant
                    acceleration situations: the establishment of a terminal velocity. After 20 sec-
                    onds or so, the forward force of the road (from the pedaling) matches the
                    backward force of the air. At this point we have no net force (or a very small
                    net force), and the velocity stays at the terminal velocity.
                        Why the stair-stepping look to Figure 14-9? We used a time step of one
                    second to do the calculation of the velocity function bikeVelocity, but then
                    we asked the plotFunc function to give us a plot of that function every half a
                    second. If we want a smooth plot, we have a couple of options. The simplest
                    would be to ask for a plot with time values spaced at least one second apart.
                    Alternatively, we could calculate the bikeVelocity function using a smaller
                    time step. In any case, we shouldn’t ask for more resolution in the graph
                    than we asked for in the function we are graphing.
                        With the functions velocityFv and positionFv, the latter of which you are
                    asked to write in Exercise 14.4, we have general-purpose tools for solving any
                    Newton’s second law type problem in one spatial dimension with forces that
                    depend only on velocity. Before we turn to the case in which forces depend
                    on both time and velocity, let’s take a moment to view what we’ve just done
                    from a broader perspective.


      The State of a Physical System
                    A fruitful way to structure our thinking about Newton’s second law, and also
                    later about the Maxwell equations, revolves around the concept of the state
                    of a physical system, which is the collection of information needed to say
                    precisely what is going on with the system at a particular instant of time.



228    Chapter 14
    Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

          The state represents the current “state of affairs” of the system, contain-
          ing enough information that future prediction can be based on the current
          state instead of past information about the system. The state evolves in time,
          changing according to some rule.
               Given a physical system that we wish to understand, the state-based
          paradigm suggests the following conceptual division:
              1.   What information is required to specify the state of the system?
              2.   What is the state at some initial time?
              3.   By what rule does the state change with time?
               When we treated Newton’s second law with constant forces and forces
          that depend only on time, we did not use a state-based method because we
          did not need one. In those cases, we could use algebra or integration to
          find how the position and velocity of our object changed in time. When we
          looked at forces that depend on velocity, we had a schematic diagram with a
          loop that corresponded to a differential equation, shown in Figure 14-6. The
          state-based method is particularly useful for differential equations.
               There are three things to notice about Figure 14-6 that relate to the
          state-based method. First, notice that there is one integrator in the loop and
          that this integrator holds the value of velocity as state. Second, notice that
          the differential equation, Equation 14.10, gives an expression for the rate
          of change of velocity. Lastly, notice that the forces depend on velocity. For
          these three reasons, in the case where forces depend only on velocity, the
          state of the object consists of the velocity of the object.
               In general, the answer to question 1 is a data type. The state of an object
          experiencing forces that depend only on the object’s velocity is a value of
          the data type Velocity. In the next section, where forces depend on time and
          velocity, the data type we will use for state is the pair (Time,Velocity). As we
          consider more complex physical situations, the data type we use to hold the
          state of our physical system will contain more information.
               Question 2 above is, in some sense, the smallest question. It may even
          be possible to do some analysis without an answer to question 2. But if we
          wish to know properties of a system at a later time, then we wish to know
          the state at a later time, and this typically requires knowing the state at some
          earlier time. The answer to question 2 is a value of the data type from ques-
          tion 1.
               Question 3 requires a physical theory to answer. In the case of mechan-
          ics, Newton’s second law gives the rule by which the state changes in time.
               Let’s see how the state-based method applies in the case where the forces
          on an object depend only on time and the velocity of the object.


Second Law with Forces that Depend on Time and Velocity
          The next situation for Newton’s second law is when the forces depend on
          both time and velocity but not on position. The force functions depend on



                                                                           Newton’s Second Law   229
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                   two variables, time and velocity. We use F tvj to denote the jth function of
                   two variables that gives a force when supplied with time and velocity, and we
                   use F tvnet to denote the function of two variables that gives net force when
                   supplied with time and velocity.
                                                                  X
                                               F tvnet (t, v0 ) =   F tvj (t, v0 )
                                                               j

                       Figure 14-10 shows a schematic diagram for Newton’s second law with
                   forces that depend on time and velocity.

                                                            t :: R           R        1 :: R

                                                                             R




                                      F tvnet



                   F tvnet (t, v(t)) :: R


                                        /m

                                                R                            R
                             a(t) :: R                    v(t) :: R                   x(t) :: R
                                                R                            R

                   Figure 14-10: Newton’s second law with forces that depend on time and velocity

                       The schematic diagram contains a loop, so Newton’s second law is a dif-
                   ferential equation, given in Equation 14.14.

                                                   d 
                                                       t =1                                         (14.13)
                                                   dt
                                                d   1 X tv
                                                    v(t) =   F j (t, v(t))                          (14.14)
                                                dt         m
                                                               j

                        Notice that there is one integrator in the loop in Figure 14-10, which
                   holds the value of velocity as state. There is a way to solve this differential
                   equation using only velocity as the state of the object. However, since the
                   rate of change of velocity in Equation 14.14 depends on both time and veloc-
                   ity (because the forces depend on time and velocity), the state-based method




230   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

      is simpler to apply if we allow both time and velocity to be state variables.
      This is to say that the data type we will use for state is (Time,Velocity). The
      difference between Equation 14.10, which expresses Newton’s second law
      with forces that depend only on velocity, and Equation 14.14, which ex-
      presses Newton’s second law with forces that depend on time and/or veloc-
      ity, is simply that we need to know the current value of time in the latter case
      but not in the former. Including time in the state (Time,Velocity) is a simple
      way to gain convenient access to the current time.
            Which quantities deserve to be called state variables? Say I have a par-
      ticle in space acted on by a known (time-independent) force law. The state
      variables are the position and velocity because we can calculate the position
      and velocity at the next time instant from them. Why is acceleration not a
      state variable? To use the terminology of earlier sections in this chapter,
      state variables are numbers that identify a particular solution to the differen-
      tial equation—they are the initial values that convert integrals into antideriva-
      tives. Time is usually not considered a state variable, but taking it as one
      makes it easier to think about time-dependent forces. Readers interested in a
      more in-depth discussion of state variables and their uses are encouraged to
      see [16] and [17].
            The Haskell function newtonSecondTV, shown below, expresses Newton’s
      second law in the case where forces depend on time and velocity.

      newtonSecondTV :: Mass
                     -> [(Time,Velocity) -> Force]       -- force funcs
                     -> (Time,Velocity)                  -- current state
                     -> (R,R)                            -- deriv of state
      newtonSecondTV m fs (t,v0)
          = let fNet = sum [f (t,v0) | f <- fs]
                acc = fNet / m
            in (1,acc)

           Given the mass of an object and a list of forces that act on the object,
      now expressed as functions of the state (Time,Velocity), newtonSecondTV gives
      instructions for computing the time derivatives of the state variables from
      the state variables themselves. The return type (R,R) is meant to stand for
      time derivative of time, which is always the dimensionless number 1, and
      time derivative of velocity, which is acceleration. The acceleration is com-
      puted from Newton’s second law by finding the net force and dividing by
      the mass.
           To solve Equation 14.14, we will discretize time and use the Euler method.
      We’ll continue to use Equation 14.11 for the Euler method. Figure 14-11 pic-
      torially describes the Euler method for solving Newton’s second law when
      forces depend on time and/or velocity.




                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   231
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck




                                    F tv
                                      net              F tv
                                                         net              F tv
                                                                            net


                                     /m                /m                 /m

                               ∆t                 ∆t                 ∆t
                                     ×                     ×               ×


                                    ×                  ×                  ×
                    v(0)                                                          v(3∆t)
                                    ×                  ×                  ×
                           0                 ∆t                2∆t                 3∆t

                                     ∆t                 ∆t                 ∆t
                   Figure 14-11: Euler method for Newton’s second law in one dimension, for
                   the special case in which net force depends only on time and/or velocity

                        The diagram shows how functions act on the state variables at one point
                   in time to compute the state variables at the next point in time. The same set
                   of computations reoccurs at each time step to produce a new state from an
                   old state. We call the set of computations that occurs at each time step the
                   state-update function.
                        The state-update function is shown pictorially in Figure 14-12. The fig-
                   ure shows a functional diagram for state update, visually describing how
                   time and velocity at t + ∆t are computed from time and velocity at t, given
                   the force functions.



                                     F tv
                                       net


                                      /m

                                ∆t
                                        ×


                                     ×
                   v(t)                        v(t + ∆t)
                                     ×
                     t                            t + ∆t
                                       ∆t
                   Figure 14-12: Euler method update for
                   Newton’s second law with forces that
                   depend only on time and velocity

232   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

          Here are the state-update equations showing how the new state variables
      are obtained from the old state variables:

                                    t + ∆t = t + 1∆t                                         (14.15)
                                                      F tv (t, v(t))
                                                        net
                                 v(t + ∆t) = v(t) +                    ∆t                    (14.16)
                                                              m
           Equations 14.15 and 14.16 are state-update equations for an object ex-
      posed to forces that depend on time and velocity. The state-update equa-
      tions tell us how the state variables time and velocity must be updated to
      advance to the next time step. The time update in Equation 14.15 is easy:
      we just add ∆t to the old time to get the new time. To update the velocity in
      Equation 14.16, we compute an acceleration, multiply by a time step to get
      a change in velocity, and add that change to the old velocity. Applying these
      state-update equations is how we carry out the Euler method for solving a
      differential equation. This state-update procedure is the main tool we will
      use to solve problems in Newtonian mechanics.
           The following Haskell function updateTV, named because it updates both
      time and velocity, advances the value of the state by one time step.

      updateTV :: R                           -- time interval dt
               -> Mass
               -> [(Time,Velocity) -> Force] -- list of force funcs
               -> (Time,Velocity)             -- current state
               -> (Time,Velocity)             -- new state
      updateTV dt m fs (t,v0)
          = let (dtdt, dvdt) = newtonSecondTV m fs (t,v0)
            in (t + dtdt * dt
               ,v0 + dvdt * dt)

           The function updateTV takes a few parameters and produces a function
      with type (Time,Velocity) -> (Time,Velocity). The third input of updateTV,
      named fs with type [(Time,Velocity) -> Force], could have been an input
      with type [Time -> Velocity -> Force]; it’s a matter of style, and either choice
      will work just fine. Here I chose the former, as time and velocity are already
      paired in the function output.
           The time-velocity pair we are passing around in this function represents
      the state of the object to which we are applying Newton’s second law. The
      function updateTV is then an example of a state-update function. In an ear-
      lier section, when forces depended only on velocity, the velocity alone acted
      as state, and the function updateVelocity was the appropriate state-update
      function.
           The functional diagram in Figure 14-12, Equations 14.15 and 14.16,
      and the function updateTV express the same information in different forms,
      namely how to take one step in time with the Euler method.
           Depending on what we want to calculate, there are two things we might
      do with the updateTV function, corresponding to two types of representation
      of the time-velocity data. First, we may wish to produce a list of time-velocity

                                                                            Newton’s Second Law   233
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                   pairs. Second, we may wish to produce velocity as a function of time. We’ll
                   develop functions for these two purposes in the next two subsections.

                   Method 1: Produce a List of States
                   A list of time-velocity pairs can be regarded as a solution to a Newton’s sec-
                   ond law problem with forces that depend on time and velocity because a
                   time-velocity pair gives the state. The list of states contains a time-velocity
                   pair for each time that has been probed by the Euler method in Figure 14-11.
                   The function statesTV produces a list of time-velocity pairs when given a time
                   step, a mass, an initial state, and a list of force functions.

                   statesTV :: R                              -- time step
                            -> Mass
                            -> (Time,Velocity)                -- initial state
                            -> [(Time,Velocity) -> Force]     -- list of force funcs
                            -> [(Time,Velocity)]              -- infinite list of states
                   statesTV dt m tv0 fs
                       = iterate (updateTV dt m fs) tv0

                        We use iterate to achieve the repeated composition in Figure 14-11.
                   But which function do we want to iterate? It’s not simply updateTV because
                   updateTV takes three parameters as input before the time-velocity pair. The function we
                   iterate must have type a -> a, or in this case (Time,Velocity) -> (Time,Velocity).
                   The solution is to give updateTV its first three parameters to form the function
                   we send to iterate. The function we want to iterate is updateTV dt m fs, start-
                   ing with the initial time-velocity pair tv0.
                        The function statesTV gives a general-purpose way of solving any New-
                   ton’s second law type problem in one spatial dimension with forces that de-
                   pend only on time and velocity. By a solution, we mean an infinite list of
                   states (time-velocity pairs) of the object, spaced one time step apart from
                   each other.

                   Method 2: Produce a Velocity Function
                   Now we want to write a function, velocityFtv, that is similar to velocityCF,
                   velocityFt, and velocityFv, but for the case of forces that depend on time and
                   velocity. We’ll use the infinite list produced by statesTV, picking out the par-
                   ticular time-velocity pair that comes closest to our desired time and using
                   the Prelude function snd to return the velocity, unpaired from the time.

                   velocityFtv :: R                           -- time step
                               -> Mass
                               -> (Time,Velocity)             -- initial state
                               -> [(Time,Velocity) -> Force] -- list of force funcs
                               -> Time -> Velocity            -- velocity function
                   velocityFtv dt m tv0 fs t
                       = let numSteps = abs $ round (t / dt)
                         in snd $ statesTV dt m tv0 fs !! numSteps


234   Chapter 14
    Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

               With the functions velocityFtv and positionFtv, the latter of which you
          will be asked to write in Exercise 14.9, we have general-purpose ways of solving
          any Newton’s second law type problem in one spatial dimension with forces
          that depend only on time and velocity. Let’s now take a look at a situation
          that involves just such forces.


Example: Pedaling and Coasting with Air Resistance
          As an example of a situation with forces that depend on time and velocity,
          let’s reconsider our child bicycle rider who is pedaling and coasting, but
          now in the presence of air resistance. We’ll consider two forces in this situ-
          ation. First, there’s the time-dependent force Fpc (t) of pedaling from Equa-
          tion 14.8. Second, there’s the force of air resistance Fair (v0 ) that impedes the
          motion of the child, for which we’ll use Equation 14.9. The net force is
                                      F tv
                                        net (t, v0 ) = Fpc (t) + Fair (v0 )

               The mass of the bike plus child is m = 20 kg. We’ll choose a drag coef-
          ficient of C = 2, take the density of air to be ρ = 1.225 kg/m3 , and approx-
          imate the cross-sectional area of bike and rider to be 0.5 m2 . Starting from
          rest, our mission is to find the velocity of the bike as a function of time.
               We update the velocity with Equation 14.16. Before we use our Haskell
          functions to investigate the motion of the bike, we’ll show how to use the
          Euler method by hand.


          Euler Method by Hand
          Let’s use the Euler method by hand to compute several values of velocity
          for the bike. Again, the purpose in doing the Euler method by hand is sim-
          ply to get a clear picture of how the state variables get updated in the Euler
          method. We’ll pick a time step of 6 s, even though this is too big to get ac-
          curate results, as it is not small compared to relevant time scales, such as the
          20-second cycle time. We choose a time step of 6 s so we can sample both
          pedaling and coasting over the first few time steps. Our mission is to com-
          plete the following table. We can fill in all of the time values because they
          are simply spaced at six-second intervals. The initial velocity is 0, so we’ll fill
          that in as well.

                                              t (s)    v(t) (m/s)
                                                0      0.0000
                                                6
                                               12
                                               18

              The force of pedaling is either 10 N or 0 N, depending on the value of
          the time.
                                        Fpc (0 s) = Fpc (6 s) = 10 N
                                       Fpc (12 s) = Fpc (18 s) = 0 N

                                                                              Newton’s Second Law   235
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                       Repeatedly applying Equation 14.16, we obtain the following:

                                    F tv
                                      net (0 s, v(0 s))(6 s)
                    v(6 s) = v(0 s) +
                                             20 kg
                                            (10 N)(6 s)
                           = 0.0000 m/s +
                                                20 kg
                           = 3.0000 m/s
                                        F tv
                                          net (6 s, v(6 s))(6 s)
                   v(12 s) = v(6 s) +
                                                 20 kg
                                               [(10 N) – (1)(1.225 kg/m3 )(0.5 m2 )(3.0000 m/s)2 ](6 s)
                           = 3.0000 m/s +
                                                                       20 kg
                           = 4.3463 m/s
                                         F tv
                                           net (12 s, v(12 s))(6 s)
                   v(18 s) = v(12 s) +
                                                   20 kg
                                               [(0 N) – (1)(1.225 kg/m3 )(0.5 m2 )(4.3463 m/s)2 ](6 s)
                           = 4.3463 m/s +
                                                                      20 kg
                           = 0.8752 m/s

                       The completed table looks like this:

                                                          t (s)    v(t) (m/s)
                                                          0        0.0000
                                                          6        3.0000
                                                          12       4.3463
                                                          18       0.8752

                        Let’s turn now to Haskell, using each of the two methods we discussed
                   earlier.


                   Method 1: Produce a List of States
                   Here we’ll use the function statesTV to produce an infinite list of velocity-
                   time pairs called pedalCoastAir for the child on the bike.

                   pedalCoastAir :: [(Time,Velocity)]
                   pedalCoastAir = statesTV 0.1 20 (0,0)
                                   [\(t,_) -> pedalCoast t
                                   ,\(_,v) -> fAir 2 1.225 0.5 v]

                        Notice the data that must be supplied to solve this problem. We pro-
                   vide a 0.1-s time step, the 20-kg mass, an initial state consisting of 0 for the
                   time and 0 for the velocity, and the two forces, expressed here as anonymous
                   functions. The function pedalCoast is a function only of time, so it cannot be
                   listed directly as a force function because a force function for statesTV takes



236   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

      a time-velocity pair as input. The underscores are present because the ped-
      aling function does not depend on the second item in the state, which hap-
      pens to be velocity, and because air resistance does not depend on the first
      item in the state, which happens to be time.
           A list of pairs is something we can plot with the plotPath function from
      the gnuplot library, but we need to truncate the list to a finite list before plot-
      ting, or plotPath will hang while trying to finish calculating an infinite list. In
      pedalCoastAirGraph below, we use the takeWhile function to extract the states
      with times less than or equal to 100 seconds.

      pedalCoastAirGraph :: IO ()
      pedalCoastAirGraph
          = plotPath [Title "Pedaling and coasting with air"
                     ,XLabel "Time (s)"
                     ,YLabel "Velocity of Bike (m/s)"
                     ,PNG "pedalCoastAirGraph.png"
                     ,Key Nothing
                     ] (takeWhile (\(t,_) -> t <= 100)
                         pedalCoastAir)

           This code produces Figure 14-13, which shows the velocity as a function
      of time for the child pedaling and coasting in the presence of air resistance.




      Figure 14-13: Pedaling and coasting with air resistance

          As expected, the child’s speed increases during the pedaling intervals
      and decreases during the coasting intervals.


      Method 2: Produce a Velocity Function
      Now let’s use the function velocityFtv to produce a velocity function for the
      child on the bike.

                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   237
             Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck


                    pedalCoastAir2 :: Time -> Velocity
                    pedalCoastAir2 = velocityFtv 0.1 20 (0,0)
                                     [\( t,_v) -> pedalCoast t
                                     ,\(_t, v) -> fAir 1 1.225 0.5 v]

                        The data we give to pedalCoastAir2 is the same data we gave to pedalCoastAir.
                    Because pedalCoastAir2 is a function R -> R, it can be plotted with the plotFunc
                    function from the gnuplot package. It would produce the same graph as that
                    in Figure 14-13.


      Summary
                    This chapter discussed Newton’s first law and introduced Newton’s second
                    law in the context of one-dimensional motion. The chapter presented a se-
                    quence of increasingly sophisticated settings for Newton’s second law. Eas-
                    iest among them is when the forces on an object are constant, that is, un-
                    changing in time. Next is when the forces on an object depend only on time,
                    in which case we can apply integration to find the velocity and the position
                    of the object. Forces that depend on velocity, such as the air resistance intro-
                    duced in this chapter, require that we solve a differential equation, which is
                    a more complex task than integration. The chapter also introduced the Eu-
                    ler method for solving a first-order differential equation. The Euler method,
                    along with Newton’s second law, provides a rule for updating the state of the
                    object we are tracking, allowing us to predict its future motion. The choice
                    of state variables, or physical quantities contained in the state, is determined
                    by what the forces depend on. If forces depend only on velocity, then veloc-
                    ity alone can serve as the particle state. If forces depend on time and veloc-
                    ity, we use time and velocity as state variables.
                         In the next chapter, we allow the forces to depend on position as well as
                    time and velocity. This produces a second-order differential equation and
                    requires that time, position, and velocity all be state variables.


      Exercises
                    Exercise 14.1. Write a function velocityCF' that does the same thing and has
                    the same type signature as velocityCF, but in which the time t :: Time is listed
                    explicitly on the left of the equal sign in the definition.

                    velocityCF' :: Mass
                                -> Velocity          -- initial velocity
                                -> [Force]           -- list of forces
                                -> Time -> Velocity -- velocity function
                    velocityCF' m v0 fs t = undefined m v0 fs t


                    Exercise 14.2. Using the positionCF function, make a graph for the position
                    of the car on the air track in Example 14.1 as a function of time. Assume the
                    initial position of the car is –1 m.

238    Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

      Exercise 14.3. Write a function

      sumF :: [R -> R] -> R -> R
      sumF = undefined

      that adds a list of functions to produce a function that represents the sum.
      Replace undefined with your code, and feel free to include one or two vari-
      ables to the left of the equal sign in the definition. Using sumF, we could write
      the first line in the let construction of velocityFt as fNet = sumF fs.
      Exercise 14.4. Write a Haskell function

      positionFv :: R                   -- time step
                 -> Mass
                 -> Position            -- initial position x(0)
                 -> Velocity            -- initial velocity v(0)
                 -> [Velocity -> Force] -- list of force functions
                 -> Time -> Position    -- position function
      positionFv = undefined

      that returns a position function for a Newton’s second law situation in which
      the forces depend only on the velocity. Replace the undefined with your code,
      and feel free to include variables to the left of the equal sign in the definition.
      Exercise 14.5. Any Newton’s second law problem that can be solved with
      velocityFv can also be solved with velocityFtv. Rewrite the bikeVelocity func-
      tion so that it uses velocityFtv instead of velocityFv.
      Exercise 14.6. Doing the Euler method by hand on page 225, we found the
      velocity after 1.5 s to be v(1.5 s) = 2.1295 m/s. Use the velocityFv function to
      calculate this same number.
      Exercise 14.7. Doing the Euler method by hand on page 235, we found the
      velocity after 18 s to be v(18 s) = 0.8752 m/s. Use statesTV or velocityFtv to
      calculate this same number.
      Exercise 14.8. Fix the stair-stepping issue in Figure 14-9 so that a smooth
      plot appears.
      Exercise 14.9. Write a Haskell function

      positionFtv :: R                    -- time step
                  -> Mass
                  -> Position             -- initial position x(0)
                  -> Velocity             -- initial velocity v(0)
                  -> [(Time,Velocity) -> Force] -- force functions
                  -> Time -> Position     -- position function
      positionFtv = undefined

      that returns a position function for a Newton’s second law situation in which
      the forces depend only on time and velocity. Replace the undefined with your
      code, and feel free to include variables to the left of the equal sign in the
      definition.

                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   239
            Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

                   Exercise 14.10. Produce a graph of position versus time for the situation in
                   Figure 14-13.
                   Exercise 14.11. To deepen our understanding of the Euler method, we’ll do
                   a calculation by hand (using only a calculator and not the computer).
                        Consider a 1-kg mass exposed to two forces. The first force is an oscilla-
                   tory force, pushing first one way and then the other. With t in seconds, the
                   force in Newtons is given by

                                                       F1 (t) = 4 cos 2t

                       The second force is an air resistance force in Newtons, given by

                                                        F2 (v0 ) = –3v0

                   where v0 is the current velocity of the mass in meters per second.
                      The net force is

                                       F tv
                                         net (t, v0 ) = F1 (t) + F2 (v0 ) = 4 cos 2t – 3v0

                       Suppose the mass is initially moving 2 m/s so that

                                                       v(0 s) = 2 m/s

                       Use the Euler method with a time step of ∆t = 0.1 s to approximate the
                   value of v(0.3 s). Keep at least four figures after the decimal point in your
                   calculations. Show your calculations in a small table.
                   Exercise 14.12. Write a Haskell function

                   updateExample :: (Time,Velocity) -- starting state
                                 -> (Time,Velocity) -- ending state
                   updateExample = undefined

                   that takes a time-velocity pair (t0 , v0 ) and returns an updated time-velocity
                   pair (t1 , v1 ) for a single step of the Euler method for a 1-kg object experienc-
                   ing a net force of

                                       F tv
                                         net (t, v0 ) = F1 (t) + F2 (v0 ) = 4 cos 2t – 3v0

                       Use a time step of ∆t = 0.1 s. Show how to use the function updateExample
                   to calculate the value v(0.3 s) that you calculated by hand in Exercise 14.11.
                   Exercise 14.13. Consider a 1-kg object experiencing a net force

                                                     F tvnet (t, v0 ) = –αv0

                   where α = 1 N s/m, subject to the initial condition v(0 s) = 8 m/s. Use
                   the Euler method to find the velocity of the object over the time interval
                   0 s ≤ t ≤ 10 s. Plot velocity as a function of time to see what it looks like.
                   Compare your results to the exact solution:

                                                     v(t) = (8 m/s)e–αt

240   Chapter 14
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck

          Try out different time steps to see what happens when the time step gets
      too big.
          Find a time step that is small enough that the Euler solution and the
      exact solution nicely overlap on a plot. Find another time step that is big
      enough that you can see the difference between the Euler solution and the
      exact solution on a plot.
          Make a nice plot (with title, axis labels, and so on) with these three solu-
      tions on a single graph (bad Euler, good Euler, and exact). Label the Euler
      results with the time step you used and label the exact result “Exact.”
      Exercise 14.14. Consider the differential equation

                                       dv(t)
                                             = cos(t + v(t))
                                        dt
      subject to the initial condition v(0) = 0. This differential equation has no
      exact solution. Use the Euler method with a step size of ∆t = 0.01 to find v(t)
      over the interval 0 ≤ t ≤ 3. Make a nice plot of the resulting function and
      include the value v(3) to five significant figures.
      Exercise 14.15. Each wire in a functional diagram can be labeled with a
      type. Label each wire in Figure 14-11 with a type.




                                                                       Newton’s Second Law   241
Functional Programming for Physics Geeks (Sample Chapter) © 2022 by Scott N Walck
