      Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott




          SELECTING ACTIVE COMPONENTS
                                             4
                     Generally, active components will define
                    the major capabilities and specifications
                  of your designs. You’ll spend most of your
               component-selection time looking for your ac-
        tive components, so it’s important to look for the right
        specification. In this chapter, we’ll look at some of the
        most common categories of active components and
        discuss what to consider when selecting them.

Advertised vs. Actual Performance
        As we explore active components, keep in mind that datasheets have been
        known to fib about the performance of some parts. After you gain some
        experience scanning distributor websites for particular parts, you’ll get an
        idea of what’s on the market. If you see a part that claims performance that
        seems too good to be true, it probably is. Datasheets love to use flashy claims
        on the first page to draw you in. For example, wideband amplifiers that
        claim 20 dB of gain will, upon closer inspection, actually only give you 20 dB
        of gain at exactly one input voltage, one input RF power, and one frequency.
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

                        For a more realistic view of a part’s performance, test it on an evaluation
                   board first, especially if you’re planning to use the part at or near any of its
                   limits. You can sometimes get evaluation boards for free through sales engi-
                   neers, but you may need to buy them. If they’re too expensive, you can try
                   fabricating one yourself, since evaluation board Gerber and manufacturing
                   files are almost always released publicly or available upon request. The idea
                   is that you can verify that the datasheet is telling the truth and that the part
                   will perform the way you expect in your application before you commit to
                   ordering it in large quantities.


     Oscillators and Crystals
                   When oscillators are used as an external reference for an IC, the datasheet
                   and application notes often give oscillator parameters needed to guarantee
                   nominal IC operation. They’ll sometimes also recommend specific part
                   numbers. Follow these recommendations and use the suggested part if pos-
                   sible. That said, sometimes the suggested part numbers will be end of life or
                   unavailable, so don’t just blindly use the recommended parts without check-
                   ing that they’re still active and in stock with an authorized distributor.
                        Crystal oscillators typically need two external capacitors, called shunt
                   capacitors, to function correctly. You can get the value of these capacitors
                   from the datasheet or you can calculate it. A good reference for these calcu-
                   lations is the Guidelines for Oscillator Design on STM8AF/AL/S and STM32
                   MCUs/MPUs (application note number AN2867, available as a free PDF
                   from ST Microelectronics). That design guide, while written for specific
                   microcontrollers, contains a wealth of general information about oscilla-
                   tors and crystals, so rather than re-create it here, I recommend giving it a
                   look. In most circumstances, the best thing to do is use the values specified
                   by the oscillator’s datasheet. Always use NP0/C0G-type capacitors. You can
                   optionally decrease the capacitance by 1 or 2 pF, depending on the physical
                   size of the capacitors you’re using to compensate for the extra capacitance
                   you’ll get between the capacitor terminals and PCB’s ground plane. As long
                   as you’re within a couple of pF of the correct value, the oscillator should be-
                   have just fine.
                        If you plan on using a crystal oscillator outside of its temperature range,
                   you need to characterize its performance yourself. The datasheet will only
                   guarantee performance within a certain temperature range, and outside of
                   that range, the crystal may experience an activity dip. This is the point where
                   the crystal suddenly increases in resistance, which can cause a frequency er-
                   ror of up to 20 ppm that can make your system lose phase lock. These dips
                   happen at very narrow temperature ranges, and they’re almost never speci-
                   fied in the datasheet. If your design needs a highly accurate clock reference
                   over a large temperature range, you should characterize the crystal you’re
                   planning to use and design around those points if necessary.
                        A crystal’s resonant frequency also changes slightly over time as the crys-
                   tal ages. Luckily, this change is very small, usually about 5 ppm during the
                   first year and 10 to 20 ppm over the next 10 years. Still, for very sensitive


66   Chapter 4
      Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

        designs, it’s important to be aware of this fact. The aging effect isn’t im-
        pacted by temperature.
            Silicon oscillators offer several advantages over crystal oscillators. In-
        stead of a piece of quartz vibrating, it’s a MEMS structure on silicon. This
        allows silicon oscillators to be physically smaller than crystal oscillators and
        allows them to be programmable to a range of frequencies. Silicon oscil-
        lators can operate from 1 kHz up to 170 MHz and include EMI-reduction
        features.
            Before 2018, silicon oscillators could fail if exposed to even small con-
        centrations of helium gas. There was an incident where a bunch of tech-
        nicians installing an MRI machine had their iPhone 8s all die because of
        a small helium leak. Eventually, the gas dissipated and the phones started
        working again. It turned out that helium molecules were small enough to
        migrate inside the silicon package of the oscillator and cause a significant
        frequency deviation. Since then, manufacturers have developed special
        packages and coatings that reduce or eliminate this problem. If you decide
        to use a silicon oscillator, you may want to find one that’s rated to operate in
        atmospheres containing concentrations of small gas molecules, especially if
        you expect your product to have to operate under those conditions.


                                         ADCS AND DACS

             There’s a huge amount of information to consider when choosing an ADC or
             DAC, and there simply isn’t room in this book for the discussion they deserve.
             Instead, check out TI’s “Choose the Right A/D Converter for Your Application”
             and The Data Conversion Handbook by Analog Devices (2005). They’re both
             among the resources linked on the website for this book.




Power Supplies
        When choosing power supplies, take the time to calculate your power bud-
        get by determining the minimum and maximum current and power that
        each component in your design will require. Then make sure your power
        supplies can provide at least 10 percent more than what you need. Also
        make sure none of your components are dissipating more power than they’re
        rated for, and that you’ve taken measures to handle any heat produced by
        those parts.


        Voltage Conversion
        A switched-mode power supply or DC/DC converter is the best way to go
        from a low voltage to a high voltage and vice versa. This is useful when you
        need to move large amounts of power. It’s more efficient to send the power
        using a high voltage; the current will be lower, which will reduce your loss
        due to resistance in your traces, cables, or transmission lines. However, since



                                                                        Selecting Active Components   67
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

                   most designs tend to run at a low voltage, you’ll need to reduce the voltage
                   back down again, which is where an SMPS comes in.
                         There are myriad SMPS and DC/DC converter ICs that you can use. TI
                   has a nice, free online tool called WEBENCH (https://webench.ti.com) that
                   will help you run some simulations and find a part that meets your require-
                   ments. SMPSs can be fickle if you don’t use the right inductor, use a poor
                   layout, don’t have enough output capacitance, or run the part outside of its
                   operating range. Make sure to use as many of the suggested parts in the ap-
                   plication note as possible, and follow the layout guidelines. There’s more
                   information about that in Chapter 6.
                         If the FET in an SMPS is switching below 20 kHz, you’ll hear a soft hum-
                   ming or squealing noise coming from the inductor and capacitors. This is
                   because some capacitors are slightly piezoelectric, and some wire-wound in-
                   ductors will physically move slightly as their magnetic field changes, creating
                   sound. You can solve this problem by running the SMPS above 20 kHz. This
                   way, any sound produced will be above the human hearing range.
                         Sound shouldn’t be the only reason you pick a particular switching fre-
                   quency, though. More importantly, the switching frequency decides what
                   value inductor you need, and the higher the inductance you need, the larger
                   the physical inductor must be. Because there are so many different SMPS
                   ICs, topologies, and applications, discussing exactly how to choose a switch-
                   ing frequency for your design is outside the scope of this book. The datasheet
                   for your SMPS IC should have a section on switching frequency and usu-
                   ally some suggested inductors. The TI WEBENCH tool will also let you sort
                   SMPS ICs by the physical layout area required for operation, which includes
                   the inductor size. It’s common for chips to abstract away the switching fre-
                   quency design decision for you and simply call out a single inductor value
                   to use to get the performance described in the datasheet. In any case, you
                   need to be aware of the size of the inductor required for a particular IC, es-
                   pecially if you have a space-constrained design. Semiconductor companies
                   can get tricky on you because they’ll have big, glossy advertisements about
                   how small their SMPS IC package is but conveniently leave out that the size
                   of the required inductor is just as big or bigger.
                         SMPSs can cause your power lines to have extra voltage ripple caused
                   by the inductor switching on and off. This ripple is characterized in the
                   datasheet of the IC, but it’s critical that you use the right capacitors to achieve
                   datasheet performance. The number of capacitors, their type, where they’re
                   placed, and their value all determine the cleanliness of the power on the
                   output of the SMPS. If ripple is important to you, check the part’s datasheet
                   before you choose to use it, and make sure it’s acceptable even after derating
                   it slightly.
                         Make sure you use DC/DC converters exactly as described in their data-
                   sheets and application notes. If you’re using a DC/DC converter in a non-
                   standard way, talk to the application engineers or simulate it using a model
                   from the manufacturer and real (non-ideal) components. LTspice is a good
                   simulation tool for those kinds of situations, and it’s free. Keep in mind that
                   DC/DC converters are less stable at small (less than 20 percent) loads. Also,


68   Chapter 4
Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

  don’t use the synchronization feature on DC/DC converters unless you re-
  ally need it. It’s easy to cause increased noise or oscillation if the feature isn’t
  used exactly right.
       Following the application notes for DC/DC converters will get you to a
  working circuit, but application notes don’t always show the most optimal
  way to design with the part. They’re usually pretty good, but, as an example,
  some DC/DC converter application notes will recommend placing a snub-
  ber circuit near the switching transistor to help reduce EMI. This will reduce
  EMI, but it will also reduce the DC/DC converter’s efficiency. As a rule of
  thumb, follow the application note, but keep your wits about you and know
  that it’s okay to change things if you know what you’re doing.


  Low-Dropout Regulators
  If you use low-dropout regulators (LDOs), consider using parts rated for low
  noise. They usually don’t affect cost and can have significantly lower ripple
  on the output. They can also save you a few components by reducing the
  number of output capacitors you may need.
       Remember to compensate for the dropout voltage of your LDOs in your
  power budget. If you want 5 V on the output, you need to provide more than
  5 V on the input. The lower the dropout of the part, the better, since less
  power will be lost as heat. LDOs operate most efficiently when their input
  voltage is just high enough to account for the drop, since any higher voltage
  will just be burned out as heat.
       LDOs have a power supply rejection ratio (PSRR) that’s given in the data-
  sheet. This is the attenuation in dB of the noise on the input of the LDO
  compared to the output. It’s not uncommon for this value to be 40 to 50 dB,
  or even higher, depending on the dropout voltage. You can take advantage of
  this by using LDOs as a power supply filter. This can be helpful for remov-
  ing ripple from an SMPS or any noise picked up by a long power cable. A
  common technique is to use an SMPS to do large voltage conversions more
  efficiently and then put an LDO with a low dropout right before the ICs
  you’re trying to power to help isolate them from the noise of the rest of the
  power nets.


  Thermal Shutdown
  One nice feature that many power supply ICs contain is thermal shutdown.
  An internal temperature sensor will automatically disable the regulated out-
  put once the chip gets too hot. Thermal shutdown is often triggered at very
  high temperatures, so reliability of the part will be poor if it’s operated in
  a way that triggers thermal shutdown with any regularity. This feature is
  meant more as a safety measure.
      Power supply ICs will sometimes also have a “power good” pin, which
  you can use to drive an LED or check with a microcontroller to detect fault
  conditions and take the correct action. Look for both of these features when
  shopping for power supply chips.


                                                                  Selecting Active Components   69
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

     Microcontrollers
                   Before you go all in on a microcontroller, buy a development board for it.
                   This will give you a good idea of how painful it is to actually get code run-
                   ning on the chip, and you’ll get a feel for what development will be like.
                   Development boards sold directly by the manufacturer are sometimes very
                   expensive, but you can almost always find a cheaper third-party development
                   board. Check sites like Tindie, eBay, or AliExpress. I also recommend talk-
                   ing to someone who has used the chip you’re considering. They can be a
                   great help in getting past the marketing veneer and finding out what it’s re-
                   ally like to develop on the chip.
                        Before you decide on a microcontroller or processor, you should read
                   its errata. This is a separate document you need to download from the man-
                   ufacturer’s website that lists all of the known problems or mistakes in the
                   silicon, what their symptoms are, and what (if any) workarounds exist. Read-
                   ing this document can save you days or weeks of troubleshooting and, in
                   extreme cases, can cause you to pick a different part.


                   Choosing the Right Microcontroller
                   Look for microcontrollers that already contain as many of your require-
                   ments as possible. For instance, if your requirements call for Ethernet, try
                   to find a microcontroller with built-in Ethernet instead of having to use an
                   external Ethernet IC. Avoid as much bit-banging as you can. A hardware
                   implementation of a bus or protocol on your microcontroller will save you
                   lots of development time, will generally have better performance, and is less
                   likely to have bugs. On the other hand, bit-banging can be a great way to
                   work around a buggy hardware peripheral.
                        Besides Ethernet, other common buses that some microcontrollers in-
                   clude are USB, I2C, SPI, USART, and UART. Different chips have different
                   numbers of each of those buses, so if you have a UART-heavy application,
                   for example, try to find a chip that includes multiple UARTs. You can also
                   find microcontrollers that support specialized protocols like MIDI or CAN
                   bus, and there are even microcontrollers with built-in radio modules. This
                   can save you a lot on your BOM, since you can eliminate an entire external
                   IC and just use your microcontroller. Sometimes microcontrollers won’t let
                   you use all peripherals all at the same time because of limitations in pin con-
                   figurations, so you should download the manufacturer’s configuration tool
                   to verify that you can actually use the combination of peripherals you want.
                        When it comes to memory requirements, estimate the amount of both
                   RAM and nonvolatile storage that you’ll need. If you need more nonvolatile
                   storage than your preferred microcontroller can provide, you can use an
                   external storage component. SPI EEPROMs are common and can store
                   huge amounts of information (this can be useful for storing lookup tables
                   to improve application performance). Talk to your software team about how
                   much RAM and storage they’ll need to meet the design requirements. You’ll




70   Chapter 4
Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

  also need them to weigh in on performance requirements: the number of
  cores and threads, clock speeds, and whether any cryptographic or graphics
  acceleration cores are needed. If your software team is already familiar with
  a particular processor family or architecture, or has a lot of code and boiler-
  plate written for it, you should probably give more weight to that processor
  family or architecture when selecting one.


  Considering Software Development Environments
  You should also investigate the software development environment required
  for a microcontroller before deciding on a part. If you decide to use the pro-
  prietary tools that the manufacturer provides, test them out first and take
  a look through the provided example code and libraries. You may be sur-
  prised at the poor quality of the code in the provided libraries, and it’s likely
  that there will be bugs.
       If you decide to use the manufacturer-provided IDE, make sure to bud-
  get for it. Sometimes they can be extremely expensive. Other times they cost
  money but have a free, feature-reduced version. Not realizing this before-
  hand could cause you to exceed your budget or waste time optimizing code
  size if you can’t afford the IDE.
       You also have the option of using a free, open source tool chain. There
  are lots of tools and support for almost every microcontroller out there, but
  because of that, you’ll probably need to take some time to get your devel-
  opment environment set up for your particular chip. One IDE that does a
  good job of integrating a lot of tools together for you is PlatformIO (http://
  platformio.org). It doesn’t have support for every single IC, but it does sup-
  port a lot, especially for IoT applications.


  Derating the Operating Parameters
  It’s always a good idea to derate microcontroller operating parameters so
  you aren’t running them at their maximum ratings. Table 4-1 shows NASA’s
  recommendations for derating integrated circuits.

  Table 4-1: Integrated Circuit Derating
    Stress parameter             Derating (digital)   Derating (linear)
    Max. supply/input voltage    90%                  80%
    Power dissipation            80%                  75%
    Max. junction temperature    80%                  75%
    Max. output current          80%                  80%
    Max. clock frequency         80%                  80%


      Keep in mind that these are guidelines, and since these guidelines are
  from NASA and intended for spacecraft design, they’re conservative.




                                                                  Selecting Active Components   71
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

     RF Components
                   There are a lot of nuances to consider when choosing RF components, and
                   a full treatment of how to design an RF signal path is outside the scope of
                   this book. In this section, we’ll look at a few of the more universal RF part
                   selection considerations that apply to complex designs as well as simpler and
                   more commonly encountered RF circuits.


                   Frequency-Dependent Parameters
                   If you’re picking out an RF part, pay attention to the insertion loss at the fre-
                   quency you’ll be using it. Insertion loss changes based on frequency, but the
                   datasheet will usually advertise the minimum insertion loss across its entire
                   frequency operating range. If you’re not careful, your link budget will be
                   wrong because you didn’t account for the extra loss at your actual frequency
                   of operation. As always, you need to check the plots in the datasheet and
                   not go by the bullet points on the first page.
                        The higher the power that you’re working with, the more important loss
                   is in your parts. Consider a cable that you measure to have 1 dB of loss. At a
                   low power, the difference of a single dB is a small amount of absolute power.
                   But at a high power, a single dB can be watts of difference. This is why it’s
                   usually a good idea to put the high power/gain stage right before your an-
                   tenna. Even low-loss cables can cause you to drop significant power if they’re
                   too long or if you put them in the wrong place.
                        Gain is another frequency-dependent parameter that can be advertised
                   in a misleading way. This is especially true for wideband amplifiers. No mat-
                   ter what the datasheet says, an amplifier can’t be both perfectly wideband
                   and perfectly high-gain. There will be a curve showing gain over frequency,
                   and that’s the chart you should look at, not the gain in huge print on the first
                   datasheet page or in the ad. The gain is usually lowest near the edges of the
                   advertised frequency range. For example, if a part claims that it has 30 dB
                   of gain and works from 1 to 2 GHz, you probably won’t see 30 dB of gain at
                   2 GHz. Very high-gain amplifiers will typically have a relatively small fre-
                   quency range.


                   Amplifiers
                   If you want to amplify a signal up to any reasonably high power, you’ll al-
                   most certainly need to use multiple amplifiers, or at least a single multistage
                   amplifier. As such, don’t be surprised if you can’t find a part that will do,
                   say, +30 dB of gain at +36 dBm out. Instead, maybe look for one amplifier
                   that does +25 dB of gain at +26 dBm out, and a second amplifier that does
                   +10 dB of gain at +36 dBm out. There’s a trade-off between the maximum
                   power out of an amplifier and the maximum gain it exhibits.
                        Don’t count on being able to achieve the maximum power out adver-
                   tised for an amplifier, however, especially if it’s a lot of power. Give yourself
                   at least 1 or 2 dB of headroom, even if you’re going to be running the ampli-
                   fier into hard saturation. As always, the best thing to do is to get an evaluation

72   Chapter 4
Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

  board of the amplifier you’re interested in and drive it the way you’ll be driv-
  ing it in your product to see what performance you get. These development
  boards are often several hundred dollars, but you can usually get them for
  free from a sales engineer. You can also check eBay or AliExpress for un-
  official development boards for some parts, although these usually don’t
  come with documentation. Manufacturers will also usually give you the Ger-
  bers for the development board for free so you can fabricate and assemble it
  yourself. The only downside with that approach is that you don’t get a piece
  of paper with measured, verified performance data of your development
  board from the manufacturer.
       In an ideal amplifier, gain is linear. If you make the input signal a little
  bit bigger, the output will be proportionally bigger. But real amplifiers be-
  have that way only up to a point, after which the amplifier starts to go into
  compression. The input power where you no longer get a linear gain, but
  instead get a gain 1 dB less than you would expect an ideal part to have, is
  called the 1 dB compression point, or P1dB . This is an important number to
  look at, especially if you’re going to be running an amplifier in compres-
  sion or at its maximum output power. Figure 4-1 illustrates the difference
  between an amplifier’s ideal response and its actual response and shows the
  P1dB point.




                                                              Ideal response
                                                       1 dB
   Power out (dBm)




                                                          Actual response




                                                       P1dB


                                      Power in (dBm)

  Figure 4-1: P1dB is the point where an amplifier’s gain is 1 dB less than it
  would ideally be.

       Amplifiers also have a stability factor, or k-factor, that tells you if the am-
  plifier will begin oscillating under poor impedance-matching conditions.
  You can find amplifiers that are both conditionally and unconditionally sta-
  ble. Prefer amplifiers that are unconditionally stable. Unconditional sta-
  bility means that no matter what impedance you put on the input or the
  output of the amplifier, it won’t oscillate. That doesn’t mean it will never
  oscillate (there are other conditions you can subject it to that can cause


                                                                    Selecting Active Components   73
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

                   oscillation), but using an unconditionally stable amplifier can save you a lot
                   of troubleshooting.
                        Why would anyone ever want to use an amplifier that isn’t uncondition-
                   ally stable? As in everything, there are trade-offs in making an amplifier un-
                   conditionally stable. Specifically, the noise figure or P1dB may be worse in
                   an unconditionally stable design versus a conditionally stable design. If these
                   are trade-offs you’d like to play with, then you can choose a conditionally
                   stable amplifier.

     NOTE          If you want to read more about amplifier stability, there’s a classic paper called
                   “Avoiding RF Oscillation” by Les Besser (Applied Microwave and Wireless,
                   spring 1995) with lots of good information. It’s linked on this book’s website,
                   https://designingelectronics.com.

     Transistors
                   Discrete transistors find uses in devices like motor controllers, load switches,
                   and power supplies. To use them successfully, there are a few factors you
                   need to consider.


                   MOSFETs
                   MOSFETs (metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors) should al-
                   ways be derated. Follow the NASA recommendations shown in Table 4-2.

                   Table 4-2: MOSFET Derating Guidelines
                     Stress parameter          Derating
                     Power                     60%
                     Current                   75%
                     Voltage                   75%
                     Junction temperature      80%
                     Gate-to-source voltage    60%
                     Source-to-drain voltage   75%


                       MOSFETs don’t instantly turn on and off. They have a gate capacitance
                   that can be quite large in some cases. This capacitance adds a time delay be-
                   fore the MOSFET turns on. When picking a MOSFET, check that the gate
                   capacitance isn’t so large that you won’t be able to meet timing require-
                   ments. The equation for the time it takes for a MOSFET gate to charge to
                   the gate voltage and turn on is:
                                                                    VGS – VTH
                                               t = RG × Ciss × ln
                                                                    VGS – Vgp

                        In this equation, RG is the gate resistance, Ciss is the gate capacitance
                   of the MOSFET as seen by the gate driving circuit at VDS , VGS is the final
                   gate voltage, VTH is the gate turn-on threshold voltage, and Vgp is the gate

74   Chapter 4
       Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

         plateau voltage. You can obtain all of these values except Vgp from tables
         in the datasheet. To get Vgp , find the gate charge curve and determine the
         voltage where the curve plateaus. The gate charge curve will have VGS on the
         y-axis and Qg on the x-axis. Figure 4-2 shows a typical curve.

                             12



                              9
          Gate voltage (V)




                              6



                              3



                                  2   4      6    8    10    12
                                          Gate charge (nC)

         Figure 4-2: Example gate charge curve

             In the example shown in the figure, the plateau occurs in the middle of
         the curve, at about 7 V. That’s the value of Vgp .

NOTE     The full derivation of the gate charge time equation can be found in Vishay appli-
         cation note AN608A, available at https://www.vishay.com/docs/73217/
         an608a.pdf.

         Drivers
         Determine if you need a driver IC or circuit to control any switching semi-
         conductors. For example, a microcontroller or processor general-purpose
         input/output (GPIO) pin won’t be able to provide enough current or volt-
         age to fully switch a large power transistor. GaN FETs require a specific
         power-up sequence or else they’ll break, so you need a special driving cir-
         cuit for those devices. When choosing the driving method, pay attention to
         the switching times so that you can meet timing requirements. Having a fast
         MOSFET doesn’t do you any good if you use a slow driver.


         Drain-to-Source Resistance
         All diodes and FETs dissipate power because there’s a nonzero drain-to-
         source resistance, or Rds . If you’re designing low-power or battery-operated
         electronics, a high Rds will dissipate power unnecessarily. This can cause
         your measurement of consumed power to be higher than the value you

                                                                         Selecting Active Components   75
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

                   calculated. In high-power devices that are switching large currents, a high
                   Rds can cause your MOSFETs to overheat and fail prematurely or require
                   significant thermal management.
                        Avoid these problems in the first place by checking the drain-to-source
                   resistance during component selection. You can calculate how much power
                   (in watts) your MOSFET will dissipate as a result of Rds by simply squaring
                   Ids and multiplying it by Rds . It’s typically pretty easy to find a MOSFET that
                   has an Rds of under 1 Ω, so that’s a good place to start.
                        It’s important to note that Rds increases as temperature increases, so if
                   you’re running your circuit in a hot environment or if you have insufficient
                   heat sinking, your MOSFET will get hot, which will cause Rds to increase.
                   This will dissipate more energy as heat, which will make Rds increase even
                   more. You’ll get stuck in thermal runaway until your MOSFET explodes. To
                   avoid this, make sure that you calculate the expected thermal dissipation due
                   to Rds across your entire temperature specification.


     Diodes
                   Choose LEDs to be sufficiently bright. LEDs should have a maximum for-
                   ward current of less than the maximum current source and sink rating on
                   the LED driver or GPIO pin you’re using to drive them. If they don’t, they
                   should be buffered. You can’t run an ultrabright 10 W LED off a microcon-
                   troller pin.
                        When using a diode in series, make sure you compensate for the voltage
                   drop across the diode. If you need a really small forward voltage drop across
                   a diode (usually the case when you use a diode in series), use a Schottky diode.
                   The trade-off is that they have a higher reverse bias leakage current, and this
                   gets worse as the Schottky diode’s temperature increases.
                        Make sure the diode you pick can handle the current you need to put
                   through it. You also need to specify the reverse voltage (the point at which
                   the diode will begin to break down and start conducting in the “wrong” di-
                   rection). Once you start approaching the rated reverse voltage, the diode
                   will start to get leaky, and small amounts of current will start to flow. Use
                   the I-V curve in the datasheet of the part you pick to figure out exactly how
                   much current that is. If you don’t give yourself enough headroom between
                   the rated values and what you’re actually subjecting the part to, you can end
                   up with an inefficient design, since you’ll be losing energy through diode
                   leakage.
                        It’s possible to use a Zener diode as a voltage regulator, but it’s not rec-
                   ommended. A Zener diode regulator will have poor efficiency and poor
                   power handling, and it won’t be very good at maintaining a regulated volt-
                   age. That said, they’re very cheap, and if you have a low-power application
                   that can handle those drawbacks, it may be an okay choice. A related ap-
                   plication of Zeners that can work well is as a voltage reference. You can
                   also use a Zener as part of a clamping circuit to ensure that the voltage at
                   a particular point never exceeds the reverse breakdown voltage of the Zener
                   diode.


76   Chapter 4
       Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

              Be aware that low-voltage Zeners (below about 6 V) have a soft knee—
         that is, they start conducting before the breakdown point, making them look
         “leaky.” Zener diodes are also temperature sensitive. In fact, they have a neg-
         ative temperature coefficient when operated below about 5 V and a positive
         temperature coefficient when operated above 5 V. The datasheet will usu-
         ally contain a graph that shows you the temperature coefficient versus the
         voltage.


Batteries
         There are dozens of battery chemistries to choose from, and each one has
         its own advantages and limitations. Which chemistry you choose will depend
         on what fulfills your requirements, but 90 percent of designs can get by with
         one of the chemistries discussed in this section. If you’re in the 10 percent
         that’s unable to use any of these chemistries, you either need a more exotic
         chemistry (which is outside the scope of this book) or, more likely, need to
         try to change your requirements or specifications.
               Remember that you need to properly dispose of all battery types. If you
         just throw batteries away, they can poison the environment at best and ex-
         plode or start a fire at worst.
               If you need to measure detailed information about your battery per-
         formance, you can use a chip called a gas gauge. Gas gauges are all slightly
         different, but generally they have a Coulomb counter to measure charge ac-
         cumulation into a battery, as well as current and voltage sensing. They can
         also sometimes provide digital outputs that report whether the battery volt-
         age is sufficiently high, the charging state, and other useful pieces of infor-
         mation for managing battery charging or alerting your user.
               Note that in battery parlance, a primary battery isn’t rechargeable, while
         a secondary battery is rechargeable. A battery’s capacity is measured in amp-
         hours (Ah) or milliamp hours (mAh). A battery with a rating of 1 Ah can
         discharge 1 amp for 1 hour, 0.5 amps for 2 hours, 2 amps for 0.5 hours, and
         so on.
               Batteries also have a C rating, a dimensionless number used to describe
         the battery’s charge and discharge rate. When a battery’s C rating is listed,
         it’s usually referring to the maximum discharge rate. For example, a 1 Ah
         battery with a 1 C rating means that it can discharge no more than 1 amp in
         1 hour before damage starts to occur. The same 1 Ah battery with a 10 C
         rating means that it can discharge up to 10 amps for 0.1 hours (which is
         6 minutes). However, just because you can discharge a battery at a huge C
         rate doesn’t mean you should. Pulling a lot of current from a battery is go-
         ing to make your battery get hot and will probably shorten its lifespan if you
         do it over and over. It’s better to make sure you have a little room between
         the C rate you’re using and the maximum C rating of your battery. Also,
         never charge batteries at a C rating above what the datasheet recommends.
         For most batteries, this is 1 C. Doing so could damage the battery.




                                                                         Selecting Active Components   77
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

                   Lithium
                   When people talk about lithium batteries, they’re usually referring to sec-
                   ondary (rechargeable) lithium-ion batteries. Within the group of lithium-
                   ion batteries, the two most common chemistries you’ll encounter in
                   consumer electronics are lithium polymer (LiPo) and lithium iron phos-
                   phate (LiFePO4).
                        In lithium polymer batteries, the electrolyte is a polymer instead of a
                   liquid. These batteries have a high energy density and a nominal cell volt-
                   age of 3.7 V. The two most ubiquitous form factors of LiPo batteries are
                   flat cells (also called prismatic cells) and cylindrical cells. Flat cells are ex-
                   actly what they sound like: thin, rectangular batteries. They come in all sizes,
                   and cells of this kind are typically stacked on top of one another for mul-
                   ticell packs. Meanwhile, cylindrical cells come in standard sizes with the
                   names referring to the physical dimensions of the battery. For example, the
                   18650 is one of the most common and popular cylindrical cells and has a
                   diameter of 18 mm and a length of 65 mm (just ignore the ending zero).
                   There are other sizes of cylindrical cells available, but 18650 is by far the
                   most common and popular. In addition to these two common form fac-
                   tors, LiPo batteries are also available as coin cells. There are many different
                   sizes of coin cells, and you can buy both primary and secondary lithium
                   coin cells.
                        LiPo batteries with multiple cells must be balanced. That means the volt-
                   age on each cell needs to be the same so they’re all discharged at the same
                   rate. Many multicell LiPo batteries come with balancing circuitry already in-
                   cluded in the pack. Depending on how the battery is constructed, however,
                   you’ll probably still need to use a balancing external charger.
                        The failure mode you’ll see if the batteries aren’t balanced is that the
                   pack will begin to get puffy as gas escapes and builds up inside. If a LiPo is
                   puffy, stop using it. Puffy LiPos can heat up, self-ignite, and then self-oxidize.
                   Because the battery creates its own oxidizer when burning, it’s impossible to
                   put out the fire with water. You just have to sit back and wait for the fire to
                   burn itself out. Some battery packs have temperature probes built into them
                   so the charger can detect any failure modes before they happen and stop
                   charging. It’s a good idea to use this feature if you can.
                        There are many cheap ICs designed explicitly for charging LiPo batter-
                   ies, from one to many cells. This way, the battery can be charged while it’s
                   installed inside the device, rather than the user having to remove the battery
                   and charge it externally. These charging ICs do more than just apply a volt-
                   age and balance the cells. They also change the voltage and current curves
                   going into the battery to optimize its lifetime and charge it as quickly and
                   safely as possible.
                        Lithium iron phosphate is a chemistry that has the advantages of LiPo
                   while being much safer. When LiPo cells are shorted, they heat up and can
                   cause a fire. LiFePO4 batteries won’t catch on fire when punctured or crushed.
                   The trade-off is that they have slightly less energy density than LiPo batteries
                   and can cost slightly more.



78   Chapter 4
Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

       Another new lithium chemistry that’s now commercially available is
  called lithium thionyl chloride. These batteries are primary (not recharge-
  able), but they can have an extremely high energy density. A battery of this
  chemistry the size of a D cell alkaline battery can hold up to 20,000 mAh
  at 3.6 V.
       Regardless of the type, lithium batteries should be stored at around
  40 percent charge to maximize their lifetime. Most consumer products that
  use lithium batteries will be packaged and shipped at about 40 percent to
  70 percent charge. However, it’s important not to allow the cells to discharge
  below 2.0 V per cell or the battery may be permanently damaged. Note that
  if you’re shipping batteries, there may be requirements for the level of charge
  that is allowed for shipping, depending on where you are shipping to and
  from and if the batteries are on their own or are inside a product.


  Lead Acid
  Lead acid batteries are almost never used in consumer electronics, but they
  are sometimes used in robotics, automotive engineering, or other contexts
  where you need a very large energy density and a large current surge but
  don’t care much about battery size or weight. Lead acid batteries are very
  heavy (since they contain mostly lead) and have a cell voltage of 2 V. You
  usually see 6 V, 12 V, and 24 V lead acid battery packs.
      Lead acid batteries are relatively safe. However, they do contain acid,
  and they also release hydrogen gas when they’re charging, which can ex-
  plode under the right circumstances. They’re easy to recycle, provided you
  don’t allow the lead to leach into the environment. To prolong their life-
  time, lead acid batteries should be stored at 100 percent charge.


  Alkaline
  Alkaline batteries are primary batteries, meaning they’re not rechargeable.
  This is the chemistry that AA, AAA, C, and D batteries use. Alkaline bat-
  teries are the cheapest way to implement battery power because they don’t
  require recharging circuitry. However, they do require extra mechanical
  engineering, since your user needs a way to replace them when they die,
  whereas a rechargeable battery can be charged just by exposing a small con-
  nector somewhere on the device. Keep in mind that removable battery cov-
  ers can cause problems with dust or water ingress into the device.
       Correctly stored, a primary alkaline battery can have a shelf life of
  10 years. Because alkaline batteries are primary cells, you don’t need to dis-
  charge them at all before you store them. There will be some self-discharge
  over time, but it will be fairly minimal. Like lithium batteries, alkaline bat-
  teries are also available as coin cells (although not all coin cells are alkaline;
  some use different chemistries).




                                                                  Selecting Active Components   79
                 Designing Electronics That Work (Sample Chapter) © 07/15/25 by Hunter Scott

     Conclusion
                   Active components are what give your product the features it needs. They’re
                   also probably the most expensive parts in your design. They consume the
                   most power and get the hottest, too. Choosing and using your active com-
                   ponents is a key part of the design process. In this chapter, we looked at all
                   kinds of active components and what to consider when choosing them.




80   Chapter 4
