2. inside three very
   different factories
It’s hard to understand how a computer works without opening
it and looking around inside. Likewise, it’s hard to understand
how products are made without going into a factory and tour-
ing the line. Although we often think of manufacturing as the
necessary but boring step after innovation, in reality, the two
are tightly coupled. An inventor thinks about a product once;
a factory thinks about the same product day in and day out,
sometimes for years on end.
     The importance of factories as an innovation node is only
growing in today’s connected global economy. The reality is
that there is no “Apple factory” or “Nike factory.” Rather, there
is a series of facilities that are domain experts in processes
(such as PCB fabrication or zipper manufacturing) that are
44   C h a pt e r 2



curated by the familiar brands. Thus, it’s not uncommon to see
two competitors’ products running side by side down similar
lines in a single facility. This concentration of domain-specific
expertise means that the best place to learn how to make an
aspect of your product better is often the same place that
makes a similar aspect in everybody else’s products.
    Some of the greatest insights I’ve had into improving a
product have come from observing technicians at work on a
line and seeing the clever optimization tricks they’ve developed
after doing the same thing over and over for so long.
    This chapter takes you on a tour of three factories that
make everyday things: PCBs (in particular, the ones used in
the Arduino), USB memory sticks, and zippers. By peeling back
the curtain, you’ll get some insight into the design trade-offs
behind the products, and how they can be made better. In the
PCB factory, I discovered the secret of how they print a high-
resolution map of Italy on the back of every Arduino; in the
USB memory stick factory, I witnessed a strange marriage
of high- and low-tech manufacturing techniques; and in the
zipper factory, I found out how even the humblest of products
can bear valuable lessons for product designers.

Wh er e A r du i no s A r e B or n
It was July 2012, and it had been about six months since my
previous startup, Chumby, ceased operations. I had decided to
take a year off to figure things out and cross a few items off the
bucket list, one of which was a trip to Italy. My girlfriend had
the bright idea of reaching out to the Arduino team to see if I
could visit their factory in Scarmagno (this was years before
the Arduino/Genuino split) as part of our itinerary. Members
of Officine Arduino (particularly managing director Davide
Gomba) kindly took time out of their busy schedules to show
                                    inside three very different factories    45

me around their factory. They patiently waited as I expressed
my inner shutterbug and general love for all things hardware,
and I definitely came away with a lot of great photos.
    A small town in northern Italy, Scarmagno is about an
hour and a half west of Milan by car, near the Olivetti factories
on the outskirts of Torino. The town handles all the circuit
board fabrication, board stuffing, and distribution for officially
branded Arduinos. I was really excited to see the factories,
and the highlight of my tour was seeing System Elettronica,
the PCB factory that made the Arduino PCBs.
    One charming aspect of System Elettronica is that the
owner painted the factory green, white, and red to match the
colors of the Italian flag. On the factory floor, I saw some of
that spirit in the red and green posts that ran the length of
the facility.




     A wide view of the factory floor at System Elettronica in August 2012

   But I soon stopped paying much attention to the décor, as
that factory floor was also where I got to follow a fresh batch of
Arduino Leonardos through the entire manufacturing process.
Here’s how those boards were made.
46   C h a pt e r 2



Starting with a Sheet of Copper
Arduino Leonardo boards start as huge sheets of virgin copper-
clad FR-4, a material made of fiberglass and epoxy that most
PCBs use for a substrate, an insulating and structural layer
between the copper layers. The sheets were 1.6mm thick (the
most common thickness for a PCB, which corresponds to 1/16
inch), probably a meter wide, and about a meter and a half long.




            A stack of copper sheets waiting to become Arduino boards

    The first step in processing PCBs is to drill all the holes—
pads, vias (the small holes that connect different layers of the
PCB), mounting holes, plated slots, and so forth. When a PCB
is manufactured, the holes are drilled before patterning, the
stage where a masking chemical is photographically defined
on the sheet everywhere the final boards need to have copper,
including locations of traces, solder pads, and so on. Some of
the drilled holes are used to align the masks that pattern the
traces later in the process. Drilling is also a dirty and messy
process that could damage circuit patterns if they were in
place beforehand.
                                     inside three very different factories      47




           The CNC drilling head used to drill the Arduino boards

   The blank copper panels were stacked three high, and a
CNC drill took a single pass for all three, allowing it to drill
three substrates at a time.




              The drill rack used by the CNC drilling machine.
      If you’ve ever had to create NC-drill files, this is that “drill rack.”

    Every hole in the Arduino board was mechanically drilled,
including vias. The same is true of any PCB with through-holes,
which is why the via count is such an important parameter
in calculating the cost of a PCB.
48   C h a pt e r 2



    Note that the particular drill I saw at System Elettronica
was relatively small. I’ve seen massive drill decks in China
that gang (mechanically attach) four or six drill heads together
in a truck-size machine, processing dozens of panels at the
same time as opposed to the three panels this drill could
handle. The reasoning behind this approach is that the precise,
robotic positioning assembly is the expensive part of a drilling
machine. The drill itself is cheap—just a spinning motor to
drive the bit. So, one way to increase throughput is to gang
several drills together on one large assembly and move them
in concert. Each individual drill still goes through its own
stack of panels, but for the price of one X-Y positioner, you
get four to six times the throughput as the drill I saw on my
trip to Italy. Those bigger machines drill so fast and hard that
the ground shakes with every via drilled, even from several
meters away.
    Once the panels are drilled, cleaned, and deburred, they
are ready for the next step in the manufacturing process.




          A stack of finished, drilled panels of Arduino Leonardo boards
                                      inside three very different factories     49


Applying the PCB Pattern to the Copper
The next step is to apply a photoresist, a light-sensitive chemi-
cal, to the panel and expose a pattern. At System Elettronica,
this process used a light box and a high-contrast film. I’ve also
seen direct laser imaging—in the form of a raster-scanning
laser—used to apply a pattern to a PCB. Direct laser scanners
are more common in quick-turn proto­type houses, and film
imaging is more common in mass-production houses.




       Before and after: the right panel shows photoresist prior to exposure,
                              and the left panel after.




A PCB being mounted into a light box that will expose its unprocessed backside film
50   C h a pt e r 2



    After the pattern is applied, each panel of boards is sent
into a machine to be developed. In this case, the same machine
is used to develop both the photoresist and the soldermask.




                      The machine that develops the photoresist




                This photo of a panel with developed photoresist is
           one of my favorite photos from the System Elettronica factory.
            Also, something about “Codice: Leonardo” just sounds cool.
                                inside three very different factories   51


Etching the PCBs
After photo processing and development, the panels go through
a series of chemical baths that etch and plate the copper.
    The panels are swished gently back and forth in a chemi-
cal bath to expedite the etching process. The movement also
circulates used etchant away from the panels, ensuring a
more uniform etch rate regardless of the amount of copper to
be removed. Moving the panels through these chemical baths
was fully automated at Scarmagno. Automation is necessary
because the panels must be treated with a series of caustic
chemical baths with minimal exposure to oxygen. Oxygen can
spoil a panel in a matter of seconds, so the transfer between
the baths needs to be fast, and the amount of time a panel
spends in a bath must be consistent. The baths also contain
chemicals harmful to humans, so it’s much safer for a robot
to do this work.




             A machine that moves panels around in etchant

    Once the panels are processed in this series of solutions, a
dull, white plating (which I’m guessing is nickel or tin) develops
on all the surfaces of the panel not treated with photoresist,
including the previously unplated through-hole vias and pads.
52   C h a pt e r 2




Panels of Arduino Leonardo boards after going through a series of chemical baths

     At this point, the resist and unplated copper are stripped
off, leaving just the raw FR-4 and the plated copper. The final
step of processing produces a bright copper finish.




                      A panel etched of unwanted copper
                                    inside three very different factories    53




PCB panels with bright, shiny copper. This photo doesn’t show an Arduino panel,
     as those weren’t going through the machine when I photographed it.


Applying Soldermask and Silkscreen
Once the copper is polished, the panels are ready for the solder-
mask (a protective, lacquer-like layer that insulates the copper
traces below and prevents solder bridging above) and silkscreen
(the ink used to label components, draw logos, and so on).
These are applied in a process very similar to that of the trace
patterns, using a photomask and developer/stripper machine.




   A panel of Arduino boards with both soldermask and silkscreen developed
54   C h a pt e r 2



    In the case of Arduinos, the silkscreen is actually a second
layer of soldermask. A very specific formulation of dry-film
white soldermask was procured for the Arduino team to create
a sharp, good-looking layer that resolved the intricate artwork
you see on Arduino boards—particularly the map of Italy on
the backside. Other techniques I’ve seen for producing silk-
screen layers include high-resolution inkjet printing, which is
better suited for quick-turn board houses, and of course, the
namesake squeegee-and-paint silkscreen process.

Testing and Finishing the Boards
After all that chemical processing, the panels receive a protec-
tive plating of solder from a hot-air solder leveling machine.
    With the solder plating in place, every board is 100 percent
tested. Every trace has its continuity and resistance measured
with a pair of flying probes. The process I saw is called flying
head testing (also referred to as flying probe testing), and in that
sort of setup, several pairs of arms with needlelike probes test
continuity between pairs of traces in a swift tapping motion.
Considering all the traces on an Arduino Leonardo, that’s a
lot of probing! Fortunately the robot’s arms move like a blur,
as it can probe hundreds of points per minute.

Note      An alternative to flying head testing is clamshell testing,
          where a set of pogo pins is put into a fixture that can test the
          entire board with a single mechanical operation. However,
          clamshell fixtures are very labor-intensive to assemble and
          maintain, and require physical rewiring every time the Gerber
          files describing the PCB images are updated. So, in lower
          volumes, flying probe testing is more cost-effective and flex-
          ible than clamshell testing.
                                    inside three very different factories   55




                    A stack of near-finished PCB panels,
          ready for a final step of routing out the individual boards

    This particular facility only created the panels; a different
factory actually populated the components. In situations like
that, before the panels can be sent to the next factory, the
individual PCBs need to be routed so they’ll fit inside surface
mount technology (SMT) machines to have the components
placed. The panels are once again stacked up and batch-
processed through a machine that uses a router bit to cut and
release the boards. After that, the boards are finally ready to
ship to the SMT facility.




                 Several Arduino panels, stacked for routing
56   C h a pt e r 2




             Smaller 2×6 panels make SMT processing more efficient.




              A veritable stack of about 25,000 bare Arduino PCBs,
           ready to leave the PCB factory. From there, they were stuffed,
                  shipped, and sold to makers around the world!

    I’m glad I made the side trip to visit the Arduino PCB fac-
tory. I’ve visited several PCB factories, and every one has a
different character and its own set of tricks to improve yield, as
well as unique limitations that designers need to compensate
for. It was also interesting to see the little trick about using an
                             inside three very different factories   57

extra layer of soldermask instead of silkscreen for achieving
high cosmetic quality. While the resolution of a silkscreen is
limited by the mesh of the silk barrier to hold the paint, sol-
dermask is limited by the quality of the optics and chemical
developing, giving over an order of magnitude improvement in
resolution and ultimately a higher perceived quality. Normally
the lower quality of silkscreen is acceptable because end users
don’t see the circuit boards inside computers, but for Arduino,
the end product is the circuit board.

Wh er e USB M e mory St ick s A r e B or n
Several months after my tour of the Arduino factory, I had the
good fortune of being a keynote speaker at Linux Conference
Australia (LCA) 2013. In my talk, “Linux in the Flesh:
Adventures Embedding Linux in Hardware,” I discussed how
Linux is in all kinds of devices we see every day. This story
isn’t about Linux, but it does connect me and, tangentially,
LCA to a factory.
    One of the tchotchkes I received from the LCA organizers
was a little USB memory stick with Tux the penguin, the Linux
mascot, on the outside. When I saw the device, I thought it
was a neat coincidence that about a week before the confer-
ence, I had been in a factory that manufactured USB memory
sticks exactly like it. I saw the USB stick board assembly
process from start to finish, and it surprisingly involved a lot
less automation than the Arduino manufacturing process did.

The Beginning of a USB Stick
USB sticks start life as bare flash memory chips. Prior to
being mounted on PCBs, these chips are screened for memory
capacity and functionality.
58    C h a pt e r 2




              A workstation where flash memory chips are screened.
     The metal rectangle on the left with the circular cutaway is the probe card.

    At a workstation in this factory, stacks of bare-die flash
chips awaited testing and binning with a probe card, which
has tiny, very accurately positioned pins used to touch down
on pads only a little bit wider than a human hair on a silicon
wafer’s surface. (I love how the worker at this particular
station used rubber bands to hold an analog current meter to
the probe card.)




                              The probe card, up close
                                     inside three very different factories    59




 Looking through the microscope on the microprobing station. Notice the needles
   touching the square pads at the edge of the flash chip’s surface. Each pad is
 perhaps 100 microns on a side—a human hair is about 70 microns in diameter.

    Interestingly, the chips I saw were absolutely not tested
in a clean-room environment. Workers handled chips with
tweezers and hand suction vises and mounted the probe cards
into their jigs by hand.

Hand-Placing Chips on a PCB
Once the chips were screened for functionality, they were placed
by hand onto the USB stick PCBs. This is not an unusual
practice; every value-oriented wire-bonding facility I’ve visited
relies on the manual placement of bare die.
60   C h a pt e r 2




            A controller IC being placed on a panel of USB-stick PCBs.
            The tiny bare dies are on the right, sitting in a waffle pack.




                  A zoomed-out view of the die-placing workstation

    The lady I watched placing the bare die was using a chop-
stick-like tool made of hand-cut bamboo. I still haven’t figured
out exactly how the process works, but my best guess is that the
bamboo sticks have just the right surface energy to adhere to
                              inside three very different factories   61

the silicon die, such that silicon sticks to the tip of the bamboo
rod. A dot of glue is preapplied to the bare boards, so when
the operator touches the die down onto the glue, the surface
tension of the glue pulls the die off of the bamboo stick.
    It’s trippy to think that the chips inside my USB stick were
handled using modified chopsticks.

Bonding the Chips to the PCB
Once the chips were placed on the PCB, they were wire bonded
to the board with an automated bonding machine, which uses
computer-assisted image recognition to find the location of
the bond pads (this is part of the reason the factories can get
away with manual die placement). Wire bonding is the pro-
cess that connects an integrated circuit to its packaging, and
the automated bonding machine connected wires to the IC at
an insane speed, rotating the circuit board all the while. As I
watched this process, the operator had to pull off and replace
a misbonded wire by hand and then refeed the wire into the
machine. Given that these wires are thinner than a strand of
hair and that the bonding pads on the packaging and the IC
are microscopic, that was no mean feat of manual dexterity.

A Close Look at the USB Stick Boards
Just as the Arduino factory used panels containing multiple
Leonardo boards, the USB memory stick factory used panels
of eight USB sticks each. Each stick in the panel consisted of
a flash memory chip and a controller IC that handled the
bridging between USB and raw flash, a nontrivial task that
includes managing bad block maps and error correction, among
other things. The controller was probably an 8051-class CPU
running at a few dozen MHz.
62   C h a pt e r 2




             The partially bonded but fully die-mounted PCB that the
               factory owner gave me as a memento from my visit.
                 Some of the wire bonds were crushed in transit.
                                    inside three very different factories          63




Interestingly, the entire USB stick assembly is flexible prior to encapsulation.




    The die marking from the flash chip. Apparently, it’s made by Intel.
64   C h a pt e r 2




          A die shot of the controller chip that went inside the USB sticks

    Once the panels were bonded and tested, they were over-
molded with epoxy and then cut into individual pieces, ready
for sale.
    But that’s enough about electronics manufacturing; next,
I want to show you a different kind of factory floor.

A Ta l e of T wo Z i pper s
My friend Chris “Akiba” Wang has a similar background to
mine, except in his younger years he was way hipper: he was
a dancer for acts like LL Cool J and Run DMC in the ’90s.
After going through a phase working for big semiconduc-
tor companies, he eventually quit and followed his passion
to design and manufacture his own hardware projects. An
expert in short-range, low-power wireless networking (he’s
co-authored a book on Bluetooth low energy and sells an
Arduino + 802.15.4 variant called the “Freakduino”), he now
                                 inside three very different factories   65

consults for organizations like the United Nations and Keio
University, runs FreakLabs, and collaborates with various
dance acts, such as the Wrecking Crew, to provide unique and
compelling lighting solutions for stage shows.
    I had the good fortune of introducing Akiba to the greater
Shenzhen area on a trip with MIT Media Lab students in
2013—the same trip where we toured the USB memory stick
factory. Since then, he’s been exploring deeper and deeper into
the area. As his work spans the disciplines of performance
art, wearables, and electronics, his network of factories is
quite different from mine, so I always relish the opportunity
to learn more about his world.
    In January 2015, Akiba took me to visit his friend’s zipper
factory. I was very excited for the tour: no matter how humble
the product, I always learn something new by visiting its fac-
tory. This factory was very different from both the Arduino and
the USB stick facilities. There were far fewer employees, and
it was a highly automated, vertically integrated manufacturer.
To give you an idea of what that means, this facility turned
metal ingots, sawdust, and rice into zipper parts.




                      Approximately 1 ton of ingots,
         composed of 93 percent zinc and 7 percent aluminum alloy
66   C h a pt e r 2




             Compressed sawdust pellets, used to fuel the ingot smelter




                           Rice, used to feed the workers
                                             inside three very different factories     67




                       Finished zipper puller and slider assemblies

     Let’s look at one side of how that process actually works.

A Fully Automated Process
Between the three input materials and the output product
was a fully automated die-casting line to create the zipper
pullers and sliders, a set of tumblers and vibrating pots (or,
as I like to call them, “vibrapots”) to release and polish the
zippers, and a set of machines to deburr and join each puller
to its slider. I think I counted fewer than a dozen employees
in the facility, and I’m guessing their capacity well exceeds a
million zippers a month.
    I was mesmerized by the vibrapots* that put the zippers
together. There were two vibrapots: one with pullers and one
with sliders. Both sliders and pullers were deposited onto a
moving rail, and as I watched these miracles at work, it looked
as if the sliders and pullers were lining themselves up in the
right orientation by magic. Each fell into its rail, and at the
end of the line, they were pressed together into a familiar zip-
per form, all in a single, fully automated machine.



* I honestly don’t what they’re called, so yes, I’m going to keep calling them that.
68   C h a pt e r 2



    When I put my hand in the pot, I found there was no
stirrer to cause the motion; I just felt a strong vibration. I
relaxed my hand, and found it started to move along with all
the other items in the pot. The entire pot was vibrating in a
biased fashion, such that the items inside tended to move in
a circular motion. This pushed the pullers and sliders onto
the set of rails, which were shaped to take advantage of asym-
metries in the objects to allow only the pieces that jumped on
the rail in the correct orientation to continue to the next stage.

A Semiautomated Process
Despite the high level of automation in this factory, many of
the workers I saw were performing one operation. They fed the
pullers for a different kind of zipper into a device connected
to another vibrapot containing sliders, while the device put
the sliders and pullers together.
    Of course, I asked, “Why do some zippers have fully auto-
mated assembly processes, whereas others are semiautomatic?”
    The answer, it turns out, is very subtle, and it boils down
to shape.




         Note the difference in these two pullers, indicated by the arrows.
                                 inside three very different factories   69

    One tiny tab, barely visible, was the difference between full
automation and needing a human to join millions of sliders and
pullers together. To understand why, let’s review one critical
step in the vibrapot operation. A worker kindly paused the
vibrapot responsible for sorting the pullers into the correct
orientation for the fully automatic process so I could take a
photo of the key step.




                   Pullers coming through the vibrapot

    When the pullers came around the rail, their orientation
was random: some faced right, some left. But the joining opera-
tion must only insert the slider into the smaller of the two holes.
That tiny tab allowed gravity to cause all the pullers to hang
in the same direction as they fell into a rail toward the left.
    The semiautomated zipper design doesn’t have this tab;
as a result, the design is too symmetric for a vibrapot to align
the puller. I asked the factory owner if adding the tiny tab
would save this labor, and he said absolutely.
    At this point, it seemed blindingly obvious to me that all
zippers should have this tiny tab, but the zipper’s designer
wouldn’t have it. Even though such a tab is very small, con-
sumers can feel the subtle bumps, and some perceive it as a
70   C h a pt e r 2



defect in the design. As a result, the designer insisted upon
a perfectly smooth tab, which accordingly had no feature to
easily and reliably allow for automatic orientation.

The Irony of Scarcity and Demand
I’d like to imagine that most people, after watching a person
join pullers to sliders for a couple of minutes, would be quite
content to suffer a tiny bump on the tip of their zipper to
save another human the fate of manually aligning pullers
into sliders for eight hours a day. Alternatively, I suppose an
engineer could spend countless hours trying to design a more
complex method for aligning the pullers and sliders, but there
are two problems with that:

•    The zipper’s customer probably wouldn’t pay for that effort.

•    It’s probably net cheaper to pay unskilled labor to manu-
     ally perform the sorting.

    This zipper factory owner had already automated every-
thing else in the facility, so I figure they’ve thought long and
hard about this problem, too. My guess is that robots are
expensive to build and maintain; people are self-replicating
and largely self-maintaining. Remember that third input to
the factory—rice? Any robot’s spare parts have to be cheaper
than rice for the robot to earn a place on this factory’s floor.
    In reality, however, it’s too much effort to explain this
concept to end customers; in fact, quite the opposite happens
in the market. Putting the smooth zippers together involves
extra labor, so the zippers cost more; therefore, they tend to
end up in high-end products. This further enforces the notion
that really smooth zippers with no tiny tab on them must be
the result of quality control and attention to detail.
    My world is full of small frustrations like this. For example,
most customers perceive plastics with a mirror finish to be
of a higher quality than those with a satin finish. There is
                              inside three very different factories   71

no functional difference between the two plastics’ structural
performance, but making something with a mirror finish takes
a lot more effort. The injection-molding tools must be pains-
takingly and meticulously polished, and at every step in the
factory, workers must wear white gloves. Mountains of plastic
are scrapped for hairline defects, and extra films of plastic are
placed over mirror surfaces to protect them during shipping.
    For all that effort, for all that waste, what’s the first thing
users do? They put their dirty fingerprints all over the mirror
finish. Within a minute of a product coming out of the box,
all that effort is undone. Or worse yet, the user leaves the
protective film on, resulting in a net worse cosmetic effect
than a satin finish.
    Contrast this to satin-finished plastic. Satin finishes don’t
require protective films, are easier for workers and users to
handle, last longer, and have much better yields. In the user’s
hands, they hide small scratches, fingerprints, and bits of dust.
Arguably, the satin finish offers a better long-term customer
experience than the mirror finish.
    But that mirror finish sure does look pretty in photographs
and showroom displays!
