New for You




             Get edgy. Swap
             the cardigan for
              a leather moto

                                                                                                                                 3
                  jacket.



                                                                                                                          Move
                                                                                                                          over,
                                                                                                                        mistletoe.
                                                                                                                         This year the
                                                                                                                         kissing ball is
                                                                                                                         where it’s at.
                                                                                                                         What started




                                                                                                                                                   Wardrobe st yl ing: Megan Hun ger ford. Hair: Takash i Ash izawa. Makeup: Alb e e Franson. Manicure: Riwako Kobayashi for Atelier Management.
                                                                                                                         as an English
                                                                                                                       tradition during
2                                                                                                                          the Middle


Silver                                                                              Sheen and be
                                                                                                                        Ages is now a
                                                                                  sheen. Metallic                       one-and-done


Belles
                                                                                jeans are perfect
                                                                               for day to night—                        way to punch
                                                                                 pair with a flowy
                                                                            blouse and a chunky
                                                                                                                       up an entryway
                                                                                    cardigan for a                     and, of course,
                                                                                 totally wearable
                                                                                   look, anytime.                          encourage
                                                                                                                        holiday guests
                                                                                                                         to pucker up.
                                                                                                                           Eucalyptus
                                                                               Cardigan, Kersh, shopkersh
                                                                                  .com, $105. Blouse, a.n.a,
                                                                                                                          Kissing Ball,
                                                                                jcpenney.com, $36. Jeans,
                                                                               Jessica Simpson Collection,                treeclassics
                                                                                 jessicasimpson.com, $79.
                                                                                  Necklace, E.Shaw Jewels,                 .com, $20.
                                                                                    eshawjewels.com, $95.
                                                                                    Booties, Vince Camuto,
                                                                                   vincecamuto.com, $139.



                Ride it out. Uber Gift Cards—in amounts from $15 to $500—are now available nationwide at major retailers and online
                at uber.com/gift-cards. They can been redeemed directly in the app and, unlike a fruitcake, they never expire.


12   | D e c 2 0 1 6 | FA M I LYC I R C L E .C O M                                                             Photography by T E R R Y D OY L E
New for You


4
Jingle All the Way!
Books to make the season bright

                                                                    Peek inside and you’ll find a
Aluminum trees,
throwback recipes and                                               vintage Family Circle spread!
other wonders of
American kitsch have
their moment in Sarah
Archer’s Midcentury




                                                                                                                                                     Ph otos: (mascara) Li sa Shin . St ylin g: Cour tney D e Wet. (Midc ent ur y Chr i st m as) cover design by LeAnna Weller Smith. © GE Lighting. A business of General Electric Com pany. Sp re ad
Christmas: Holiday
Fads, Fancies, and Fun
from 1945 to 1970.




Finally! A way to put
your kids’ extra LEGO


                                                                                                                                 5
pieces to good use.
In The LEGO Christmas
Ornaments Book:
15 Designs to Spread
Holiday Cheer,
                                                                                                                             Up to




                                                                                                                                                     origi nally publish ed in Family Circle m agazin e, December 1958. (LEGO Chr ist mas O rnaments Book) Chris McVeigh, The LEGO Chr ist mas O rnaments Book (No Starch Press). ( Celeb r ate
author Chris McVeigh
gives step-by-step
instructions for making
a wreath, a snowflake
                                                                                                                              Bat
and other creations.
                                                                                                                         The new class of
                                                                                                                          mascaras leaves
                                                                                          With these pieces you can     us in a flutter. With
                                                                                           construct a LEGO tree.        just a twist of the
                                                                                                                         tube, each brush
                                                                                                                       transforms to create
Get any party started                                                                                                    a different look—
with chic and cheerful                                                                                                  voluminous, curled
inspiration from Darcy                                                                                                 and more—all in the
Miller’s Celebrate
Everything! Fun Ideas                                                                                                   blink of an eye. Our
to Bring Your Parties to                                                                                                 favorites include
Life. Darcy, one of the                                                                                                    Clinique Lash
founding editors of                                                                                   Decorative         Power Flutter-to-




                                                                                                                                                     Ever yth ing) from Celebr ate Ever yth ing by Darcy Mil ler. Co pyrigh t © 201 6 by Darcy Miller. Reprinted with permission of William Morrow B ooks, an imprint of HarperCollins Pu b lishe r s.
Martha Stewart                                                                                      dessert toppers     Full Mascara ($21),
Weddings, knows her                                                                                  make simple       Woosh Beauty Flex &
way around festive.                                                                                  sweets more        Curl Mascara ($23),
                                                                                                       playful.           Flower Zoom-In
                                                                                                                         Ultimate Mascara
                                                                                                                         ($8) and Makeup
                                                                                                                        Academy Amp-Up
                                                                                                                        Adjustable Impact
                                                                                                                         Mascara ($10.50).


                    Turner’s latest launch, FilmStruck, is a brand-new subscription video-on-demand service that allows you to
                    watch movies from the award-winning Criterion Collection, all commercial-free. Indulge in instant access to a mix
                    of indie, foreign, classic and cult films—everything from Seven Samurai and A Room with a View to Mad Max and
                    Blood Simple. FilmStruck.com, $7 a month, and FilmStruck plus The Criterion Channel, $11 a month.


14   | D e c 2 0 1 6 | FA M I LYC I R C L E .C O M                                                                    See Buyer’s Guide, page 150.
New for You


6
Party Right                                                                                    Maybe you already know
                                                                                                  jack: Some say that
Download these apps to streamline                                                              jackfruit gives Juicy Fruit
the planning process and get set for                                                             gum its unique taste.
a sensational soirée.

Fête Scheduling made simple. Start by
suggesting an event, venue and date, and
the app will send the info via text message
for guests to tentatively RSVP. Once all the
details are set, you can design and send
customizable e-vites. iOS, free
Hello Vino Like a pocket-sized sommelier,
this app comes loaded with an extensive wine
database that you can skim for a quick tutorial
on varietals, flavors and food pairings. In a
rush? Just tell the app what’s on the menu,
and it’ll recommend a primo vino to match.
Android and iOS, free
Partyology With this Pinterest-style app,
search or scroll through thousands of photos
for tons of themed-party inspo. You can
even connect with local event coordinators,
bartenders and bands for additional SOS. See
something you can’t live without? Save it,
share it or press “buy.” iOS, free
Handy You’ve pulled off the ultimate bash.
Now let someone else handle the aftermath.
Find professional cleaners that have been
prescreened by the platform and reviewed
by users nearby. Last-minute messes are no
match—you can schedule a service as soon
as tomorrow. Android and iOS, free




                                                     7
                                                     Jack of All
                                                     Trades

                                                                                                                                    Ph otos: ( jackfr ui t ) iStockph oto, (product s ) Peter Ardito.
                                                     What’s spiky, green and more than a
                                                     bit prehistoric-looking? Jackfruit (an
                                                     Asian supermarket staple brimming
                                                     with potassium and fiber) is trending
                                                     as a plant-based meat substitute.
                                                     The Jackfruit Company and Upton’s
                                                     Naturals sell ready-to-eat portions for
                                                     tacos and sandwiches or as add-ins
                                                     to rice dishes. Meatless Mondays just
                                                     got so much more interesting.


16   | D e c 2 0 1 6 | FA M I LYC I R C L E .C O M                                      Illustration by A L E X E B E N M E Y E R
New for You

                                                          9
                                                          A Special Case
                                                          Get where you’re going in high-tech style with the
                                                          Raden A22 Carry. This beautifully engineered TSA-

8                                                         approved lightweight suitcase—available in a range
                                                          of colors—is sleek and smart. The handle’s built-in
                                                          scale weighs your bag, and when your 22-inch Raden
December                                                  comes down the baggage carousel, it sends your
                                                          phone an alert. Plus, the built-in battery can keep
Reel Time Movies                                          your phone charged when you’re on the road. Expect
                                                          suitcase envy. Raden.com, $295
Office Christmas Party. In an attempt to close a
crucial sale, an executive rallies his coworkers to
host an epic holiday party. Expect shenanigans from
Jennifer Aniston, Olivia Munn, Courtney B. Vance,
T.J. Miller and Jason Bateman. (December 9)

                               Fences. A father
                               struggles to provide for
                               his family in 1950s
                               Pittsburgh as racial
                               inequality flares.
                               Powerhouses Viola
                               Davis and Denzel
                               Washington pair up for
                               the film adaption of
                               August Wilson’s Pulitzer
                               Prize–winning play.
                               (December 25)


       Rogue One: A Star
        Wars Story. From
the franchise that keeps
    on giving comes this
  stand-alone film about
      resistance fighters
   who steal the original
   Death Star blueprints.
     Felicity Jones stars.
           (December 16)




Julieta. Pedro Almodóvar fans, rejoice. The Spanish
director is back with the story of a woman meeting
the love of her life, then trying to comprehend the
loss of her estranged daughter. (December 21)




                                                                                                                                                  Ph otos: cour tesy of Raden.
                          It’s easy to scream for ice cream in the winter, especially with McConnell’s Fine Ice Creams’ new limited-
                          edition Tea Set flavors. Chamomile Tea & Oatmeal Cookies and Earl Grey Tea & Butter Biscuits sound
                          cozy enough to make us want to snuggle up with a few scoops (maybe atop a piece of warm pie?) and a toasty
                          blanket. Available at mcconnells.com while supplies last, $10 per pint.


18   | D e c 2 0 1 6 | FA M I LYC I R C L E .C O M                                                      Illustrations by DA N I E L F I S H E L
