The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson




                                   UNDERSTANDING LARGE
                                                          1
                                     LANGUAGE MODELS



                                  Large language models (LLMs) are
                                 very large, deep learning models that
                                are pretrained on vast amounts of data. The
                             sheer amount of publicly available data on the
                      internet makes this training possible. Data scientists
                      combine this data with licensed sources and curated
                      datasets to train LLMs to understand patterns and re-
                      lationships in natural language.
                          Web pages, books, articles, research papers, code, and more form the
                      foundation for LLM training, illustrating how words connect to create sen-
                      tences, ideas, and concepts (Figure 1-1). By training AI models on massive
                      amounts of text, researchers discovered that these systems could develop
                      an inherent understanding of language, accumulate knowledge, and even
                      demonstrate elements of reasoning.
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                                         Training data cutoff date:
                                            September 30, 2024


                            https://                                         </>         Train

                        Web pages          Books     Articles    Research   Code
                                                                 papers                              LLM


                      Figure 1-1: LLMs are trained on vast amounts of publicly available and licensed data.

                           This was the major breakthrough in the field of natural language pro-
                      cessing (NLP) when Google researchers released Bidirectional Encoder Rep-
                      resentations from Transformers (BERT) in 2018. Table 1-1 shows how the
                      amount of data used to train LLMs has steadily increased over time. Unsur-
                      prisingly, research has shown that more training data is better.

    Table 1-1: Data Used to Train Some Well-Known LLMs
       LLM           Year              Amount of training data       Training data sources
       BERT          2018              ≈ 3.3 billion words           BookCorpus (800 million words), English
                                                                     Wikipedia (2.5 billion words)
       GPT-3         2020              ≈ 300 billion tokens          Common Crawl, WebText2, books (multiple
                                                                     sets), Wikipedia
       LLaMA         2023              ≈ 1–1.4 trillion tokens       Publicly available web data and curated cor-
       (Llama 1)                                                     pora (Common Crawl, GitHub, Wikipedia,
                                                                     books, and so on)


                           The computing costs to train your own LLM are estimated at anywhere
                      from hundreds of thousands to millions of dollars, depending on the size of
                      the model. Fortunately for us, companies are racing to release more power-
                      ful proprietary models (these cost money to use) and open weight models
                      (similar to open source) every day.
                           Thankfully, we are being given access to all these AI models through
                      something all developers know how to use: APIs and SDKs.


                                                   THE BERT BREAKTHROUGH

                             Before Google’s BERT, NLP models had difficulty understanding complex
                             sentence structures. Researchers at Google started to experiment with masking
                             random words in text and training a model to guess the missing words. The
                             model learned to pay attention to the entire sentence, looking at the words
                             before and after each blank.
                             Researchers then swapped the order of random sentences and had the model
                             guess whether the sentences followed one another. With this training, BERT
                             began to handle tasks like answering questions and summarizing information
                             with impressive accuracy. The published results of BERT drove incredible
                             advances in NLP, eventually leading to today’s LLMs.




   4     Chapter 1
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

        Understanding Text Generation
                      Anyone who has used ChatGPT knows the inputs and outputs of an LLM.
                      We prompt the LLM with questions, instructions, and examples, and it gener-
                      ates a response (Figure 1-2). The quality of the response generally depends on
                      the quality of the prompt (see Part II).



                                           Prompt




                                          Response
                                                             LLM



                      Figure 1-2: Prompts in natural language are the inputs
                      to LLMs.

                          The model predicts the word most likely to appear next in the sequence,
                      over and over, until the response generation is complete. Each word is re-
                      ferred to as a token. Tokens are not exactly words, but it is easy for us to
                      think of them that way (Figure 1-3).

                                                                                                 Token
                               Context                                                        prediction


                        Who are the Beatles?                                                      The



                        Who are the Beatles?      The                                           Beatles


                        Who are the Beatles?      The Beatles                                    are a



                        Who are the Beatles?      The Beatles are a                               rock



                        Who are the Beatles?      The Beatles are a rock                          band


                                                             . . .   . . .

                      Figure 1-3: LLMs generate responses by predicting a sequence of tokens.

                           As you can see, the prompt provides the initial context for the comple-
                      tion that will be generated by the model (in this case, “Who are the Beat-
                      les?”). The model then predicts the most probable next token and adds it to
                      the context for the next prediction until a complete response is generated.
                      This step-by-step prediction process is called an auto-regressive approach.
                      Each new token is generated based on all the tokens that came before it.
                           The process of an AI model predicting a response when given new, un-
                      seen data (a prompt in the case of an LLM) is referred to as inference. It’s

                                                                               Understanding Large Language Models   5
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                      why AI models are so useful. Once they’ve been trained, they can use what
                      they’ve learned to infer a response to new input. This ability to generalize
                      is something that humans easily do but that traditional programming has
                      never been able to achieve.

        NOTE          You don’t have to understand the architectural underpinnings of LLMs in order
                      to use these models. We’ll introduce you to the concepts and technical details you
                      need to build production-ready systems with these models. But if you’re curious and
                      really want to understand the transformer architecture that supports nearly all mod-
                      ern LLMs, start with Ashish Vaswani et al.’s paper titled “Attention Is All You
                      Need,” which introduces the core ideas behind transformers and remains the foun-
                      dational reference for anyone looking to dive deeper into how models like GPT and
                      BERT work.

        AI vs. Traditional Logic
                      Traditional programming is based on Boolean logic. It’s deterministic. We
                      know that once we’ve tested our code, a given input will result in an expected
                      output. Code is reliable and programmed to perform a very specific task.
                           This can also be a drawback. Our software is limited to the tasks we ex-
                      plicitly program it to accomplish. It can’t adapt to new scenarios. Coding
                      our solution correctly often means that an unexpected input results in either
                      some type of validation failure or an error.
                           AI models are different. They are trained to handle complex rules and
                      are extremely flexible. But this comes at a cost: The results you get with any
                      given input are probabilistic. This means that sending the same prompt to
                      an LLM twice may yield slightly different results.
                           If you were to ask ChatGPT, “Who are the Beatles?,” you would get a
                      response with members of the band, chart-topping songs and albums, and
                      their legacy. If you start a new conversation with ChatGPT and ask the same
                      question, you would get a similar but slightly different response.
                           This is a key starting point when deciding whether an AI model makes
                      sense for your specific use case. For example, if you’re using an LLM, you
                      may need to be able to tolerate variability in the response. Even with a well-
                      constructed prompt, token generation is still based on probability.
                           Also, remember that testing may prove that your AI model responds
                      correctly 99.9 percent of the time. That may be more accurate than a human
                      at a particular task, but 0.1 percent of the time, AI is still wrong. You need to
                      consider the impact of a wrong answer and how it would be handled.


                                     WHEN WE NEED A HUMAN IN THE LOOP

                           Always keep in mind that having a human involved in AI decision-making may
                           be desirable or even necessary. This is referred to as having a human in the
                           loop. The more critical the decision, the more likely a human should verify an AI
                           response for accuracy.




   6   Chapter 1
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson



                           A life-critical system is an obvious example. If there is even a small probability
                           that a decision could lead to someone’s death or severe injury, a human in the
                           loop is almost certainly required.



        The Versatility of LLMs
                      If you’ve used ChatGPT, you’ve already seen how flexible these models are.
                      You can ask it to draft an email, summarize a long article, or suggest ideas
                      for your next trip, all with plain-language instructions.
                            Under the hood, the model wasn’t trained for your exact request. First,
                      it’s pretrained on diverse text to learn a general, task-agnostic skill: predict-
                      ing the next token. Then it’s instruction-tuned with examples so it learns
                      to follow directions and produce helpful, well-formatted answers when
                      prompted. With a clear prompt (and sometimes a couple of examples), the
                      same model adapts to many tasks, no retraining required.
                            You can use these models for a wide range of practical tasks:
                          •    Writing and editing (email, drafts, and rewrites)
                          •    Summarizing (articles, reports, and transcripts)
                          •    Classifying and extracting (tagging, pulling key fields)
                          •    Translating (between many languages)
                          •    Reasoning (explaining steps, outlining approaches)
                          •    Coding (snippets, refactors, and tests)
                          •    Performing as chatbots and AI assistants
                          You can even find LLMs that have been fine-tuned to better handle
                      these and other specific tasks.
                          If this seems overwhelming, don’t worry. We’ll walk through exam-
                      ples and prompting techniques for all these use cases and more throughout
                      the book.


        Understanding the Limitations
                      The panacea of AI research is creating a truly general-purpose artificial
                      general intelligence (AGI). LLMs are not AGI, at least not yet. LLMs are in-
                      credibly powerful in their ability to understand what we are asking and to
                      generate a response, but they have limits.
                           The limitations introduced in this section are not intended to be com-
                      prehensive. We’ll continue to discuss limitations and demonstrate strategies
                      to address them through the book. Just don’t fall into the trap of thinking
                      that LLMs will always be your solution. As the saying goes: When all you have
                      is a hammer, everything starts to look like a nail.
                           Our job as developers is to make informed technology choices based
                      on the specific business problem we’re solving. We need to understand the
                      tools available, their limitations, and the trade-offs that come with them.

                                                                                  Understanding Large Language Models   7
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                      Some problems simply aren’t a good fit for LLMs. The same can be said for
                      any technology choice.


                      Limited Training Knowledge
                      An LLM’s built-in knowledge is limited to the data it was trained on
                      (Figure 1-4). The training data is bound by a cutoff date. The model does
                      not know facts that arose after the cutoff, nor does it know anything about
                      your private data unless you provide that information in the prompt. The
                      model can produce confident but outdated or incomplete answers, espe-
                      cially on recent news, proprietary information, or highly specialized topics.


                                       Training data



                      Figure 1-4: The knowledge of an LLM
                      is limited to its training data.

                          You can work around this constraint by providing the missing context
                      within your prompt at inference time. This is referred to as AI grounding.
                          In our AI support agent example, the LLM being called had no knowl-
                      edge of the product because it wasn’t trained or fine-tuned with that in-
                      formation. If the team had a knowledge base of how-to support articles,
                      they could include them in the prompt to properly ground the response
                      (Figure 1-5).

                                 I’m having password issues. Can you help me log in?



                                                               Augment with context




                        Instruction: Only use the following articles to answer the question.

                        Context: Knowledge base articles


                              How to reset your password

                              Logging in with a password and MFA

                        Question: I’m having password issues. Can you help me log in?


                                                  Augmented prompt

                      Figure 1-5: The prompt contains the user’s question along with how-to articles
                      for context.

                          In Chapter 8, you’ll learn about retrieval-augmented generation (RAG),
                      which is a targeted strategy for supplying only the context that’s needed to
                      generate a response.

   8   Chapter 1
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                      Hallucinations
                      If an LLM has not been trained on something you are asking, it may predict
                      a sequence of tokens to answer your question based on patterns it has seen
                      before. The response will seem confident, even if the model has no idea
                      what you are talking about. The LLM may even seem to make up fictitious
                      information! This is referred to as a hallucination.
                           We can all relate. You’re having a conversation with someone and think
                      you know exactly what they’re talking about. They ask you a question, and
                      you respond confidently with amazing insight. Suddenly, they look at you as
                      if you have three heads. You were so sure, but now you realize you confused
                      fragments of what you thought you knew into something that doesn’t quite
                      apply. This has never happened to any of us, right?
                           Hallucinations can also be caused by the probabilistic nature of LLMs.
                      Remember that each token is predicted based on its probability of occurring
                      next in a sequence of tokens. Even tokens with a high probability of being
                      next could be wrong, depending on the context.
                           We’ll cover a variety of strategies to help prevent hallucinations when we
                      cover prompt engineering in Part II. Just keep in mind that hallucinations
                      are always possible because of the nature of LLMs.


                      Model Bias
                      Model bias happens when AI learns patterns from data that already contains
                      human biases or gaps. If the training data leans a certain way (say, with con-
                      tent that is mostly English or from a specific region) or repeats stereotypes,
                      the model can repeat those patterns. It’s not the model “choosing” to be un-
                      fair; it’s simply echoing what it saw.
                           While the vast amount of data available on the internet makes LLM
                      training possible, we all know that human bias is everywhere. Data scien-
                      tists do their best to filter out bad training data, but models learn language
                      patterns without moral or ethical considerations.
                           This means their output can be skewed by their training data. If we
                      recognize bias in our responses, we may need to add filtering, adjust our
                      prompts, or fine-tune the model. We’ll discuss this more in later chapters.


                      Multi-Step Reasoning
                      Multi-step reasoning is hard for LLMs because they don’t “think” through
                      a problem the way people do. They generate the next likely word based on
                      patterns, not a plan. Therefore, LLMs can skip steps, mix up facts, or make
                      confident leaps that look right but aren’t.
                          Errors also compound. If one early step is off, later steps build on that
                      mistake. Long prompts make this worse. Important details can get buried,
                      the model loses track of earlier points, and it fills gaps with guesses instead
                      of asking for missing information.
                          LLMs also lack reliable self-checking. They don’t know when they’re
                      wrong, they are sensitive to the way you phrase the question, and they won’t


                                                                              Understanding Large Language Models   9
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                      verify math or logic unless you force them to. They don’t maintain a true
                      working memory across turns, so context can drift in longer tasks.
                           We’ll discuss some prompting techniques in Chapter 5 that help with
                      handling multi-step reasoning tasks.


        Improving LLM Responses
                      An LLM is essentially a black box. We don’t know exactly what data the
                      model has been trained on. For any pretrained model, we have to experi-
                      ment to determine whether it can provide a useful response as is. As you’ve
                      already learned, we can influence the accuracy of the response based on a
                      number of factors. The old adage always applies: Garbage in, garbage out.
                          Figure 1-6 shows the core customization strategies aimed at improving
                      model accuracy and how they compare in terms of time, cost, flexibility, and
                      precision.

                      Cheap and easy                   Highly flexible but less predictable



                                           Prompt engineering



                                           Context engineering



                                                Fine-tuning




                                                 Custom
                                                 model




                      More time and expense                   Focused and more precise

                      Figure 1-6: The hierarchy of model customization strategies

                          Throughout the remainder of the book, we’ll give you the knowledge
                      you need to progress down the pyramid. The following provides a quick
                      overview of each of these strategies.


                      Prompt Engineering
                      Prompt engineering requires creativity and trial and error. The goal is to
                      create prompts that provide context, instructions, and examples to help an
                      LLM understand your intent and generate a desirable response. Part II is
                      dedicated to the art and science of prompt engineering. For now, it’s key
                      to understand that your ability to write good prompts will determine your
                      success with LLMs.


   10    Chapter 1
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                          It’s always easiest (and the most cost-effective) to start with prompt engi-
                      neering. We simply create prompts and experiment with the accuracy of the
                      LLM response. If the results are promising, but we need more precision in
                      our responses, we can continue down the pyramid.


                      Context Engineering
                      Context engineering encompasses prompt engineering along with the sys-
                      tem components necessary to efficiently manage context within a prompt.
                      In the words of Andrej Karpathy (former senior director of AI at Tesla and
                      co-founder of OpenAI):
                               People associate prompts with short task descriptions you’d give
                               an LLM in your day-to-day use. [But] in every industrial-strength
                               LLM app, context engineering is the delicate art and science of
                               filling the context window with just the right information for the
                               next step.

                          You’ll learn more about context windows and the importance of manag-
                      ing the size of your prompts in Chapter 4. In the simplest terms, the context
                      window defines the limit on the size of a prompt that can be sent to an LLM.
                          As you’ll see, when we’re supplying context to an LLM, it’s important to
                      include only the facts it needs (snippets from documents, search results, or
                      memory), and put them in a clear order. This becomes even more important
                      in multi-turn scenarios (for example, chatbots or agents), as conversation
                      history can quickly fill the context window.


                      Fine-Tuning
                      Even context engineering may not be enough. Sometimes you need the
                      model itself to be fundamentally better at a particular skill or to adopt a spe-
                      cific style that is crucial for your application. This is the realm of fine-tuning:
                      taking an already powerful LLM and training it further on specialized data
                      to mold its core capabilities precisely to your needs. In Part IV, you’ll learn
                      everything you need to know to fine-tune a pretrained AI model.


                      Custom Models
                      Custom models are beyond the scope of this book. Remember, we’re the AI
                      chefs. We use APIs and SDKs to integrate pretrained AI models. We leave
                      the model building to the AI architects. That said, if you want to become an
                      AI architect, this book will give you the knowledge to know where to start.


        Building Autonomous Systems
                      Once you’ve learned how to bend LLMs to your will, you can use this knowl-
                      edge to build truly autonomous systems. As we discussed earlier, traditional
                      software systems are programmed to work in a specific way. Given a set of


                                                                             Understanding Large Language Models   11
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                      inputs, the system will do exactly what it was programmed to do. Any new
                      workflow requires you to change the system.
                           Agentic AI systems are different. These systems can operate autono-
                      mously, making decisions, taking actions, and adjusting their behavior over
                      time to achieve specific goals. They do this by coordinating tools, APIs, or
                      even other AI models to complete complex tasks.
                           Unlike traditional systems that follow fixed workflows, agents dynami-
                      cally adapt based on the situation. They can interpret a user’s intent, assess
                      the surrounding context, and make decisions on the user’s behalf. As they
                      operate, they learn from new information and refine their approach to bet-
                      ter meet their objectives.
                           Agents are a common agentic AI implementation pattern, and the
                      Model Context Protocol (MCP) is the open standard introduced to make
                      tools, APIs, and data sources accessible to AI models. You’ll learn all about
                      agents and MCP in Part V so you can start building your own agentic AI
                      solutions.


        Plugging LLMs into Your Code
                      All of this is interesting, but just like our startup team, we need a way to plug
                      these LLMs into our applications. This is where the rubber meets the road.
                           AI companies (such as OpenAI) and open source tools (such as Ollama)
                      provide APIs and SDKs that make it easy for developers to call these AI
                      models in our code. Figure 1-7 shows how ChatGPT uses these APIs to gen-
                      erate a response.



                                                  ChatGPT




                                                                   Response:
                      Prompt:
                                                                    “The Beatles are an
                      “Who are the Beatles?”
                                                                   English rock band who . . .”




                                                     API


                                                     LLM
                                                  (GPT-5.x)



                      Figure 1-7: ChatGPT is an interface that uses OpenAI APIs to interact with LLMs.




   12    Chapter 1
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                          As you can see, ChatGPT is really just an interface. When you send a
                      prompt, ChatGPT is calling an OpenAI API to interact with the actual LLM
                      generating the response.
                          In the upcoming chapters, we’ll connect to a locally run, open weight
                      LLM (Llama 3.2) through the Ollama APIs. We’ll demonstrate through
                      examples the use of low-level SDKs, lightweight wrappers, and high-level
                      frameworks to interact with models. The Llama models are built by Meta
                      and provided to the community as open weight models. This allows you to
                      run the LLM locally without paying for usage.
                          You can use the same code and tools you’ll find in this book to exper-
                      iment with any pretrained LLMs. As you’ll see in Chapter 4, the concepts
                      remain the same, but your testing may reveal that a specific model provides
                      better responses or performance, or is more cost-effective.

                                   OPEN SOURCE VS. OPEN WEIGHT MODELS

                           As developers, we’re very familiar with open source software whose code is
                           freely available to inspect, modify, and share. It’s the foundation of countless
                           tools we use daily, from operating systems like Linux to libraries on GitHub that
                           power nearly every modern application. We’ll use several open source libraries
                           to integrate AI models throughout this book.
                           In contrast, the AI community refers to models like Llama 3.2 as open weight,
                           meaning the model’s trained parameters are available, but the full source code,
                           dataset, and training process may not be. This means that Llama 3.2 is not truly
                           open source. Keep in mind that the license also restricts redistribution and
                           certain types of commercial use. We’ll revisit this topic in Chapter 4.




        Summary
                      This chapter provided a high-level introduction to LLMs and general AI
                      concepts. You started by learning how LLMs are trained on large datasets
                      of publicly available and licensed text including books, articles, and research
                      papers in order to understand natural language.
                          You then saw how LLMs generate text by predicting a sequence of to-
                      kens. You learned how AI models differ from traditional programming in
                      that their outputs (predictions) are probabilistic, not deterministic. This
                      gives them the flexibility to adapt to new situations but runs the risk of
                      mistakes.
                          You saw the versatility of LLMs and the variety of use cases they’re able
                      to handle through prompting, including writing, summarizing, classifying,
                      translating, coding, and much more. You were also introduced to the limita-
                      tions that have to be considered and addressed when using an LLM, such as
                      limited training knowledge, hallucinations, model bias, and challenges with
                      handling multi-step reasoning.
                          Finally, we introduced some of the major topics we’ll cover in the book:
                      prompt engineering, context engineering, fine-tuning, and agents. You
                      learned that we’ll be interacting with LLMs through APIs and SDKs.

                                                                               Understanding Large Language Models   13
The Developer's Guide to AI (Sample Chapter) © 3/31/26 by Jacob Orshalick, Jerry M. Reghunadh, and Danny Thompson

                          Now it’s time to dive into the code so we can get our hands dirty. In
                      Chapter 2, we’ll start just like our startup team did by calling an LLM from
                      code, using JavaScript. We’ll introduce some basic concepts along the way.
                      Then, in Chapter 3, we’ll introduce Python as we port over the example
                      from JavaScript and prepare you for the chapters to come.
                          So come on, let’s get coding!




   14    Chapter 1
