18
                    No Starch Press, Copyright © 2007, by Ulrik Pilegaard & Mike Dooley




     TH E I N SP I R ATI O N

     As LEGOLAND has proven for over 40 years, you can build just about anything with LEGO
     bricks — from buildings and windmills to ships and cable cars. With the launch of LEGO TECHNIC
     in 1978, it became possible to build mechanical devices that used gears, axles, and motors.
     Since then, LEGO has been launching new and innovative TECHNIC elements that make it easier
     and more fun to build whatever you dream of. Yes, even a Paper Plane Launcher.

     Like the Candy Coated Catapult and the Ping-Pong Cannon, this model uses non-LEGO parts that
     either are household items or are readily available in stores. It’s especially fun to build models
     that incorporate familiar items in unusual, new ways, and it’s always amazing when you see what
     you can build with a bunch of plastic parts. Most people can fold a sheet of paper into at least a
     couple of cool looking planes, and even if your paper airplanes don’t ﬂy very well on their own, the
     PPL will make them soar.



     TH E D ESI G N

     Our goal was to make this model as simple as possible without using a motor or batteries. There
     were three challenges in our design:

     1. The ﬁrst challenge was tightening the rubber band. We succeeded with a gear wheel and
        added an axle to keep the wheel from rolling back — a technique that has been around for a
        long time in the LEGO world.

     2. The second challenge was creating the launch trigger. The trigger needed to be easy to use
        and easy to reload. Ulrik came up with a particularly neat mechanism: two L-shaped half
        beams that hold the rubber band in position while you tighten it by turning the gear wheel
        ratchet. By suddenly removing the angle beam that the L-shaped half beams are resting
        against, the half beams rotate and the rubber band is released. Voilà!

     3. The third challenge was designing the paper plane holder. In order to ensure that the rubber
        band that launches the plane is guided to the tail of the plane, the plane must be placed very
        carefully in between the two rubber bands running back to the trigger. This mechanism holds
        the plane tightly enough so that it won’t release inadvertently if you point the model up or
        down, but not so tightly that the plane will not launch when the rubber band is released.
                                                                                                    19
               No Starch Press, Copyright © 2007, by Ulrik Pilegaard & Mike Dooley




LEGO R U LES B R O K EN

This model would be shot down in seconds at LEGO. Not only are you ﬁring something at a very
high speed, but the object being ﬁred is not even a LEGO part.

LEGO usually avoids including non-LEGO pieces as part of a model. One reason is quality con-
trol — LEGO has very high standards. The other reason is probably ego maintenance. Designers
consider it a cop-out to not build everything out of 100 percent LEGO pieces.

Even if LEGO had decided to create the airplane used in this model, it would probably have cho-
sen to build the frame from standard TECHNIC elements and would have used custom-designed
ofﬁcial LEGO fabric-like material for the surface of the wings. LEGO would not want to encourage
children to construct their own paper airplanes.



N O N- LEGO P A RTS USED

We used a stock LEGO rubber band from the Dragster set (#8205) to build the model shown
here. However, you can use almost any rubber band, as long as it’s long enough and you can
fasten it to the drum.

Although we attempted to incorporate everyday household items into all the projects in this book,
each part in the PPL project could be found in at least one or two LEGO sets. On the other hand,
the whole point of this model is to shoot something that is not a LEGO part: a paper airplane.
20
                No Starch Press, Copyright © 2007, by Ulrik Pilegaard & Mike Dooley


     P A P ER P LA N E LA U N CH ER
                                                                                                          21
             No Starch Press, Copyright © 2007, by Ulrik Pilegaard & Mike Dooley


PARTS LIST                                                                         PAPER PLANE LAUNCHER
22
                            No Starch Press, Copyright © 2007, by Ulrik Pilegaard & Mike Dooley


      BUILDING STEPS




     001                    x4                                   002




                       4M
     003                       2                                 004                              2
                                                                                                             23
           No Starch Press, Copyright © 2007, by Ulrik Pilegaard & Mike Dooley


                                                                                      PAPER PLANE LAUNCHER




                                                                        2M
005        x2                                   006                              x1


                                                          4M
                                                                       1




      6M
007           2                                 008                               2
