The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik




                           THE THREAT LANDSCAPE
                                                  2
                           This chapter provides a comprehensive
                           overview of space-specific threats, high-
                         lighting how adversaries can disrupt space-
                      craft operations through electromagnetic in-
              terference or by physically damaging satellites. We
              will also explore how traditional cyber threats such as
              malware, unauthorized access, and data breaches can
              manifest in the context of space missions.
                   Adversarial threats to space systems are intentional and often highly
              sophisticated. These threats come from nation-states, criminal groups, in-
              siders, and other actors aiming to disrupt, degrade, or exploit space-based
              assets. Unlike random failures or environmental hazards, adversarial threats
              are strategic, targeted, and constantly evolving. These aren’t the only dan-
              gers to space systems, however; we’ll also discuss the risks posed by non-
              adversarial threats, including natural hazards such as radiation, space
              weather, micrometeoroids, and space debris.
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

     Anti-Satellite Weapons
                   Anti-satellite weapons (ASATs) are military systems designed to disable,
                   destroy, or impair satellites critical for communication, navigation, intelli-
                   gence, and military operations. The proliferation of ASAT technologies has
                   raised concerns about an arms race in space and its implications for the in-
                   ternational security order.
                        We can broadly categorize ASAT systems as either kinetic or non-
                   kinetic. Kinetic ASATs are designed to physically destroy or incapacitate a
                   target satellite through direct impact. These systems typically use missiles,
                   projectiles, or even co-orbital spacecraft to collide with the target, causing
                   it to break apart or become inoperable.
                        Non-kinetic ASATs, on the other hand, rely on alternative means to dis-
                   rupt, damage, or disable spacecraft. For example, they may use directed-
                   energy weapons (such as lasers), signal interference techniques (such as
                   jamming or spoofing), or co-orbital satellites to interfere with spacecraft op-
                   erations. Non-kinetic approaches generally leave the satellite physically in-
                   tact but can render it useless by disrupting its functions or communications.
                        We’ll focus on kinetic weapons in this section and consider non-kinetic
                   approaches in “Electronic Warfare” on page 19. We’ll also look at other po-
                   tential physical attack vectors, before turning our attention to more tradi-
                   tional cyber warfare techniques.


                   Direct Ascent
                   Rockets, the most commonly used type of kinetic ASAT, are designed to in-
                   tercept and destroy satellites in orbit. These are often referred to as direct-
                   ascent ASATs because they are launched from the ground or from fighter
                   jets and travel directly to intercept their target without first entering orbit.
                   A rocket’s boost stage accelerates it to high enough relative velocities that it
                   can destroy a satellite upon impact, without the need for explosives.
                        To validate the effectiveness of kinetic systems or demonstrate their
                   military capabilities, nations have conducted ASAT tests that target their
                   own satellites. As those tests have shown, these actions often generate large
                   amounts of space debris. For example:
                        •    In 1985, the United States demonstrated its air-launched ASM-135
                             ASAT by destroying a defunct research satellite flying at an altitude
                             of 555 km. Nearly 300 pieces of debris were generated, with the last
                             one remaining in orbit for almost 20 years.
                        •    In 2007, China destroyed an old weather satellite at an altitude of
                             865 km using a kinetic kill vehicle, resulting in the largest debris
                             field in history. Many of the over 3,000 trackable pieces of debris
                             are expected to remain in orbit for decades or centuries.
                        •    In 2019, India’s Mission Shakti used a kinetic kill vehicle to destroy a
                             satellite that had been launched for the purposes of the test at a low
                             altitude, to minimize long-lasting debris.


18    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   •    In 2021, Russia used a direct-ascent missile to destroy a defunct
                        satellite at an altitude of about 480 km, creating 1,500 pieces of de-
                        bris that still endanger the ISS.
                 Efforts to ban such tests have been proposed but face challenges due to
              geopolitical dynamics.


              Co-Orbital
              Unlike direct-ascent ASATs, co-orbital weapons enter orbit and then ma-
              neuver to approach their target and disable, damage, or destroy it. These
              weapons pose a serious threat due to their ability to remain dormant in orbit
              until activated, allowing for stealthy and unpredictable attacks.
                   Co-orbital ASATs can use a few different attack methods. Direct colli-
              sion weapons deliberately collide with their target at high velocities, while
              others release high-speed fragments or shrapnel to increase the likelihood
              of a collision. Certain systems employ robotic arms to physically manipu-
              late, damage, or remove satellite components. At close range, some may use
              electronic and cyber warfare techniques or directed-energy weapons, as dis-
              cussed in the following section, to disrupt satellite functions.
                   Although the Outer Space Treaty prohibits nuclear weapons in orbit,
              high-altitude nuclear detonations were tested during the Cold War. More
              recently, in its 2025 Annual Threat Assessment, the US intelligence commu-
              nity accused Russia of potentially deploying a nuclear weapon in orbit.
                   While co-orbital ASAT technologies may have peaceful applications,
              such as satellite servicing, inspection, and debris removal, concerns have
              grown about their potential as weapons. The ability to position and activate
              them covertly introduces a new dimension of strategic uncertainty in space
              operations. Furthermore, they pose a significant risk of generating long-
              lasting orbital debris, exacerbated by the growing congestion in key satellite
              orbits. The continued development and potential deployment of these sys-
              tems remains a critical issue in international space security discussions, and
              efforts are being made to establish norms and treaties to mitigate their risks.


Electronic Warfare
              Electronic warfare comprises any adversary action that uses electromagnetic
              energy to achieve specific objectives, such as jamming, spoofing, or various
              types of directed-energy attacks. Its aim is typically to deny adversaries effec-
              tive use of the electromagnetic spectrum while ensuring that friendly forces
              can continue to use it.


              Jamming
              A jamming attack overwhelms signal receivers with intense electromagnetic
              noise by transmitting strong signals in the target system’s frequency range.
                  To target static-frequency systems, adversaries use spot jamming, which
              focuses on a narrow frequency band to block a signal. They may also target

                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   19
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   broadband signals with sweep jamming, moving the signal across the target
                   bandwidth, or use barrage jamming to target multiple frequencies simultane-
                   ously by distributing power across the target ranges.
                       Another technique, pulse jamming, where short bursts of noise block or
                   mask specific areas, can disrupt radar systems. For instance, jamming at-
                   tacks have targeted synthetic aperture radar (SAR) satellites, which use radar
                   signals instead of light to generate high-resolution images. Figure 2-1 is an
                   example of harmful interference recorded by one SAR satellite, ESA’s Coper-
                   nicus Sentinel-1.




                   Figure 2-1: SAR interference over Sevastopol, in Crimea, Ukraine

                        Although SAR images don’t capture visible light, color is often added
                   during post-processing to make the data easier to interpret. Areas that re-
                   flect stronger radar signals might appear in bright colors, while regions with
                   weaker reflections might appear darker.
                        The bright feature near the center of this image, captured in November
                   2023, isn’t a natural part of the landscape but an artifact caused by signal
                   interference that disrupted the Copernicus Sentinel’s ability to create an
                   image of the territory.




20    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

              Spoofing
              Interference isn’t always about blocking signals. Some attacks aim to de-
              ceive systems entirely, which brings us to spoofing. Spoofing is a deception
              technique that involves transmitting false signals to trick other systems into
              perceiving incorrect information, causing them to make misinterpretations
              and errors.
                   Attackers may combine spoofing and jamming to increase the effective-
              ness of their interference. A commonly used technique is to block all fre-
              quency bands of the GNSS spectrum except the one on which a spoofed
              signal is transmitted; the counterfeit signal might then lead the receiver to
              compute incorrect position or timing data. Similarly, a burst of jamming can
              cause receivers to lose synchronization, making a connection to a spoofing
              source more likely once the jamming stops.
                   In military applications, the increased use of drones on the battlefield
              has led to a dramatic increase in spoofing. Many highly sophisticated spoof-
              ing attacks have targeted radars to create the appearance of nonexistent ob-
              jects or manipulate signals for real objects.


              High-Power Microwave Weapons
              High-power microwave weapons are a type of directed-energy technology
              that emits intense bursts of electromagnetic energy in the microwave fre-
              quency range (300 MHz to 300 GHz). They’re designed to disrupt, degrade,
              or destroy electronic systems by overloading circuits and inducing currents,
              which can permanently damage components such as chips and printed cir-
              cuit boards.
                   Because the effective range of these weapons is generally limited to no
              more than a few kilometers, they can affect airborne targets such as drones,
              but their large power requirements make them ineffective against satellites
              when deployed from Earth.
                   High-power microwave weapons operate in either pulsed wave mode, to
              deliver short bursts, or continuous wave mode, for continuous denial of opera-
              tions. Narrow-band devices focus energy on a small frequency range, offering
              better transmission characteristics, but are limited to specific targets. Wide-
              band devices cover a broad frequency range, enabling more diverse targets
              with unknown absorption characteristics.
                   In space warfare, microwave weapons have several advantages: They
              don’t cause debris, they’re more challenging to locate than rockets, and they
              can target multiple objects simultaneously. Satellites can be equipped with
              directed-energy payloads, although again, their high power demands limit
              their effective range.


              High-Energy Lasers
              Another type of directed-energy weapon system, high-energy lasers focus
              a beam of light to deliver large amounts of energy to a target. These lasers



                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   21
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   typically operate in the infrared spectrum and can damage targets by heating
                   them, vaporizing their coatings, or harming sensitive electronics.
                        There are multiple types of lasers. Solid-state lasers use crystals as a
                   medium. Fiber lasers, which use optical fibers, are more compact and effi-
                   cient. Gas lasers excite gases, such as CO2 , to emit photons.
                        Lasers emerged as an ASAT due to their ability to disrupt or destroy
                   satellites with a low risk of creating space debris. One notable attack they
                   can perform is sensor dazzling, which blinds optical satellite sensors by over-
                   whelming them with intense light input. This is especially effective against
                   imaging and surveillance satellites that operate in the visible or infrared
                   spectrum.
                        Higher power levels can cause permanent damage to sensors or optical
                   components such as lenses and mirrors, or even lead to structural damage
                   and debris. Theoretically, a laser could someday impart small forces on satel-
                   lites to alter or de-orbit them, but due to the vast power required for such an
                   attack, this remains speculative today.


                   Electromagnetic Pulses
                   An electromagnetic pulse (EMP) is a burst of electromagnetic energy that
                   can disrupt or damage electronic systems. EMPs originate from natural phe-
                   nomena such as solar storms and lightning, as well as artificial sources such
                   as nuclear detonations or specialized microwave weapons. The pulse typi-
                   cally rises to peak intensity within nanoseconds and rapidly decays, covering
                   a wide range of frequencies.
                        Unshielded devices are especially susceptible to EMPs, as they can intro-
                   duce high voltages and currents in electronic components. Coupling effects,
                   where electromagnetic energy interacts with antennas or conductive materi-
                   als, amplify the damage.
                        In space systems, EMPs are effective due to the lack of atmospheric
                   shielding, but in military systems, layered shielding and redundancy can
                   help protect against them.


     Other Physical Attack Vectors
                   In addition to direct attacks on spacecraft, space systems can be disrupted
                   through physical attacks targeting supporting infrastructure on Earth. These
                   include ground-based facilities and communication links that satellites de-
                   pend on for operation and data transmission. Although indirect, these at-
                   tacks can have serious consequences, affecting not only individual systems
                   but also broader network functionality.


                   Ground Segment Attacks
                   Threat actors may target the ground segments of space systems. For exam-
                   ple, intruders could attempt to gain unauthorized physical access to ground
                   station facilities, then damage equipment or steal sensitive data. Insiders,


22    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

              disgruntled employees, or contractors with access to sensitive systems could
              also cause security breaches.
                  To mitigate these physical threats, spacecraft operators typically imple-
              ment security measures such as perimeter fencing, surveillance cameras, and
              security personnel, supported by regular risk assessments and disaster recov-
              ery planning.


              Undersea Cable Damage
              Undersea communication cables form the backbone of global telecommu-
              nications networks, and damage to these cables can have major implications
              for satellite operations.
                   When undersea cables fail, affected regions often use satellite networks
              to maintain connectivity. The resulting surge in demand places pressure on
              those networks, which must suddenly accommodate a much larger volume
              of data than usual. Cables may transmit terabytes of data per second, but
              most commercial satellite services are considerably slower. So, while satel-
              lites can serve as an emergency solution, they can’t fully replace the exten-
              sive data transmission capabilities of fiber-optic cables.
                   Satellites that rely on ground stations in remote locations, such as the
              High North, are more dependent on undersea cables and therefore more
              vulnerable to attacks on this infrastructure. This creates a dilemma when
              other services depend on them as a backup.
                   Although most undersea cable disruptions have resulted from natural
              disasters and accidents, recent incidents highlight a growing trend of inten-
              tional sabotage as part of hybrid warfare strategies. Russia and China have
              increasingly targeted underwater sea cables, particularly in the Baltic Sea
              and around Taiwan. Russia has also deployed a “shadow fleet” of vessels to
              conduct hybrid warfare against NATO, including by damaging European
              undersea cables. These operations are often performed under the guise of
              commercial activity, making attribution and accountability difficult.


Cyberattacks
              As space systems become increasingly important, cybersecurity vulnerabili-
              ties have emerged as critical concerns. These systems’ unique characteristics,
              such as remote accessibility, reliance on extensive data systems, and inte-
              gration of commercial, off-the-shelf components, make them particularly
              susceptible to cyberattacks.
                   While spacecraft computers might previously have had unique architec-
              tures, most new systems have an embedded Linux component onboard. Fur-
              ther, the ground segment is often distributed across several sites, as in most
              modern corporate networks. Factor in the use of cloud resources for good
              measure, and soon you will realize that the mantra “complexity is the enemy
              of security” is just as true for space systems as it is for typical IT infrastructure.
                   In this section, we highlight the cyber threats we see as especially rele-
              vant to space systems, including some you’ll encounter in typical IT systems


                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   23
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   and some you might know from working in OT environments. Subsequent
                   chapters will dive into sophisticated cyberattacks on the ground, space, and
                   user segments, but you can prevent most common attacks with good cyber
                   hygiene implemented across the organization.


                   Hijacking
                   Hijacking occurs when threat actors take unauthorized control of a com-
                   puter system, network, communications system, or spacecraft. In space
                   systems, attackers have exploited vulnerabilities in ground stations, inse-
                   cure communication protocols, or weaknesses in onboard systems to gain
                   control.
                        For example, in 2007 and 2008, attackers hacked two NASA satellites,
                   Landsat-7 and Terra AM-1, and took control of them for several minutes.
                   More recently, in cybersecurity demonstrations, ethical hackers successfully
                   hijacked operational satellites by injecting malicious code into the onboard
                   flight software, allowing them to manipulate controls.
                        Many hijacking attacks target ground stations, which often use insecure
                   protocols and may lack strong security measures. Once compromised, at-
                   tackers can sometimes use their access to send unauthorized commands to a
                   spacecraft.


                   Phishing
                   In a phishing attack, threat actors impersonate trusted entities to steal sen-
                   sitive data or deliver malware through deceptive communications such as
                   emails, text messages, or phone calls. The goal is usually to get victims to
                   click malicious links, share sensitive credentials, or transfer funds.
                        Phishing is a serious risk to satellite missions because if attackers can
                   exploit human error, they can compromise ground control systems in nu-
                   merous ways. For example, once they’ve stolen credentials or deployed mal-
                   ware, they may be able to send unauthorized commands, interfere with op-
                   erations, manipulate telemetry, or exfiltrate sensitive mission data.
                        Phishing simulations and awareness training can help reduce the likeli-
                   hood of someone opening a PDF or clicking a link, but the risk is unlikely to
                   disappear entirely.


                   Distributed Denial of Service
                   A distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack is a cyberattack designed to
                   overwhelm a target server, website, or network with traffic, rendering it inac-
                   cessible for legitimate users. Unlike standard denial-of-service (DoS) attacks,
                   which originate from a single source, DDoS attacks either crowdsource re-
                   sources or leverage a network of compromised devices, called a botnet, to
                   generate traffic from multiple locations simultaneously.
                       DDoS attacks are especially popular among hacktivist groups, and public-
                   facing space data systems have seen increased targeting since Russia invaded
                   Ukraine. In particular, hacktivists have conducted numerous attacks on the

24    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

              ground infrastructure supporting Russia’s satellite networks. These attacks
              demonstrated that, although space systems historically have not depended
              on public-facing websites for critical functions, their growing integration
              with terrestrial networks and cloud-managed ground stations has expanded
              their attack surface.
                   DDoS attacks are relatively easy to implement but have limited impact,
              as the system becomes reachable again once the attack is stopped.


              Zero Days
              Zero-day vulnerabilities are previously unknown security flaws in software
              and hardware. The term zero day reflects the fact that vendors have had zero
              days to address the issue before malicious actors discover it, at which point
              they may take advantage of it with a zero-day exploit.
                   Zero-day attacks often target widely used systems or high-value targets
              such as governmental agencies or critical infrastructure. Attackers try to
              remain undetected when carrying out these attacks, as the window for ex-
              ploiting zero-day vulnerabilities closes as soon as they are discovered and
              patched. State-sponsored actors might also purchase and save these vulnera-
              bilities for high-profile attacks.
                   Router firmware, firewalls, virtual private network (VPN) gateways, and
              operating systems (OSes) like Windows and Android are common targets
              for researchers trying to profit from finding and selling vulnerabilities. How-
              ever, any software or hardware can have zero days, especially systems that
              haven’t undergone security testing.
                   The space sector is highly susceptible to this type of threat, as it runs
              on standard IT infrastructure with potentially vulnerable components. Fur-
              thermore, many spacecraft and satellite systems rely on legacy hardware and
              software components that are often past their end of life. These outdated
              systems may no longer receive security updates or patches, exposing them to
              exploits once a zero day is discovered. The difficulty of physically accessing
              or updating satellites in orbit amplifies the potential impact of these attacks.
                   Later in this book, you’ll have several opportunities to find and exploit a
              zero-day vulnerability in a space system yourself. We’ll start diving into secu-
              rity testing in Chapter 3.


              Malware
              Malicious software, or malware for short, is any software intentionally de-
              signed to harm devices, networks, or data. The name is an umbrella term for
              a wide range of hostile software that invades systems, corrupts functionality
              and data, or enables unauthorized access. This includes:
                   Viruses Attach to legitimate files and corrupt systems. Require user
                   interaction to run and spread. A special subtype, polymorphic viruses,
                   change their code and signature to evade simple hash-based detection.




                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   25
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                        Worms Exploit network vulnerabilities to self-replicate. Unpatched
                        vulnerabilities that allow worms to spread can have large-scale global
                        impacts.
                        Trojans Disguise themselves as legitimate software to create back-
                        doors, enabling further exploitation and lateral moves across an orga-
                        nization. Trojans can be delivered in a phishing campaign and become
                        the entry point for future attacks.
                        Spyware Monitors user activity to steal data, such as credentials and
                        secret files. Keyloggers, for example, record keystrokes to capture pass-
                        words or financial data such as credit card numbers. In high-profile at-
                        tacks, actors employ sophisticated techniques to avoid the detection of
                        exfiltrated data and enable long-term persistence in targeted systems.
                        Rootkits Conceal malicious software activity to avoid detection by an-
                        tivirus software and operating system protections. They can be used
                        to support or embed other types of malware. Attackers can purchase
                        rootkits that leverage unpatched weaknesses, while more advanced ac-
                        tors might create custom kits to enable their operations.
                        Botnets Infect devices and turn them into remotely controlled, cen-
                        trally orchestrated attack tools used to spread further malware or per-
                        form DDoS attacks. Botnet software often targets outdated web servers
                        or vulnerable internet of things (IoT) devices.
                        Ransomware Encrypts files to extort money. The most prevalent mal-
                        ware, ransomware often demands payment in cryptocurrencies such
                        as Bitcoin or Monero. Payment usually doesn’t guarantee that the data
                        can be recovered. Sophisticated attackers may also exfiltrate sensitive
                        files and threaten to sell or leak them. Darknet vendors have created
                        ransomware-as-a-service kits that allow criminal organizations without
                        in-depth technical know-how to conduct attacks at scale.
                        Advanced attackers can assemble these into highly specialized and tar-
                   geted cyber weapons. The case of Stuxnet, discussed in the following box,
                   exemplifies how precisely designed malware can cause physical disruption to
                   critical infrastructure. It also demonstrates the potential of advanced threats
                   to exploit technical vulnerabilities and operational assumptions, such as the
                   security of airgapped systems.




26    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik


                            STUXNET: HOW MALWARE CAN SABOTAGE
                                      INFRASTRUCTURE

                   Stuxnet was a computer worm designed to target programmable logic con-
                   trollers (PLC) used in supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) envi-
                   ronments. Developed under the US–Israel joint Operation Olympic Games,
                   Stuxnet was meticulously engineered to sabotage Iran’s nuclear program.
                   Because Iran’s nuclear facilities were isolated from the internet, the attackers
                   introduced Stuxnet via infected USB drives carried into the facilities, likely by
                   insiders or agents. Once inside, it propagated and executed autonomously
                   across networked systems using four zero-day vulnerabilities. Stuxnet delayed
                   Iran’s nuclear program by months to years, though no state officially claimed
                   responsibility.
                   The Stuxnet worm was the first recorded case of a sophisticated cyber weapon
                   used in the wild, and it demonstrated the viability of cyber weapons for physi-
                   cal infrastructure sabotage. Further, it demonstrated that airgapped networks
                   are only effective if operators take measures to ensure they remain safe.




              Supply Chain Attacks
              Supply chain attacks aim to infiltrate systems by targeting the third-party
              components they employ. By breaching a vendor, contractor, or software
              dependency with weak security or a small contribution base, an attacker can
              affect many downstream organizations and systems.
                  A striking example of a modern software supply chain attack is the 2024
              compromise of XZ Utils, a core library embedded in countless Linux distri-
              butions. This attack unfolded gradually, revealing how even widely trusted
              software can become a vector for deep system compromise when its steward-
              ship is subverted.
                  Over the course of multiple years, the attacker embedded a malicious
              backdoor into the widely used open source compression library xz/liblzma.
              The attack targeted Linux distributions by compromising SSH authentica-
              tion through a compromised dependency.
                  This attack made use of significant social engineering. The attacker
              gained maintainer status for XZ Utils after a prolonged campaign. Fake
              accounts pressured the original maintainer to relinquish control, citing
              burnout and inactivity. The attacker contributed legitimate code for nearly
              two years before introducing the backdoor in 2024, evading detection
              through gradual, trusted contributions.




                                                                                      The Threat Landscape   27
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                        While the attack’s discovery by a developer in 2024 prevented its
                   widespread exploitation, the incident highlighted vulnerabilities in open
                   source maintenance and supply chain trust. Affected systems included
                   bleeding-edge Linux distributions such as Fedora Rawhide and Debian
                   testing and unstable versions. The identity of the threat actor remains
                   unknown, but the complexity of the operation suggests state-sponsored
                   participation.
                        Modern space systems rely heavily on Linux, including for a spacecraft’s
                   onboard computers. Supply chain attacks that affect embedded Linux sys-
                   tems often target libraries or utilities critical to system functionality. Em-
                   bedded systems frequently integrate open source libraries with minimal
                   oversight, and devices may lack automated patching, exposing them to un-
                   addressed vulnerabilities.


     Case Study: The APT Attack of the KA-SAT Satellite Network
                   Several of the examples we’ve discussed so far, such as Stuxnet, were the
                   work of advanced persistent threats (APTs): sophisticated, well-resourced threat
                   actors, often sponsored by states or organized crime groups. APTs com-
                   monly target critical infrastructure by leveraging stealth and sophisticated
                   tactics to inflict long-term damage, so they pose a substantial risk to the se-
                   curity of space systems.
                        One real-world example of an APT targeting satellite communication in-
                   frastructure occurred in early 2022, when a cyberattack on Viasat’s KA-SAT
                   satellite network coincided with the onset of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
                   This attack disrupted military communications and highlighted the vulner-
                   abilities in satellite systems, underlining the growing threats to space-based
                   technologies.
                        On February 23, 2022, the attackers exploited a VPN appliance in a
                   management center in Turin, Italy, accessing servers controlling modem
                   software updates. They deployed AcidRain, a dedicated wiper malware that
                   erased critical data on modems, rendering them inoperable. Restoring them
                   was only possible using a physical debugging interface. In a secondary at-
                   tack, the attackers overwhelmed Viasat’s servers with a custom DoS attack
                   tailored to the internal management network, preventing more modems
                   from connecting.
                        The European Union, United States, and United Kingdom formally
                   blamed Russia, citing ties to the GRU-linked Sandworm APT group. The
                   attack peaked on February 24, when it disrupted communications for Ukrai-
                   nian military operations and, as collateral damage, caused 5,800 wind tur-
                   bines in Germany to become unreachable. It severely hindered Ukrainian
                   military capabilities during the critical early hours of the invasion. Viasat
                   stabilized its network within a few days but faced ongoing attacks.
                        Today, the incident is considered one of the most disruptive opera-
                   tions in the history of cyber warfare and underscores the serious conse-
                   quences of cyberattacks on space systems. We’ll explore the attack in depth
                   in Chapter 10.


28    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

Nonadversarial Threats
              Not all threats to space operations come from hostile actions or deliberate
              interference. As you learned in Chapter 1, many risks arise from natural and
              environmental factors. This section explores these nonadversarial threats,
              including radiation, space weather, extreme temperatures, vacuum condi-
              tions, atmospheric effects, micrometeoroids, and space debris.


              Radiation
              Radiation is energy transmitted through a material or free space in the form
              of waves or particles. Electromagnetic radiation includes radio waves, in-
              frared radiation, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, X-rays, and gamma radi-
              ation, while particle radiation consists of alpha, beta, proton, and neutron
              particles.
                  Another way of classifying radiation is as ionizing and non-ionizing.
              Ionizing radiation carries more than 10 electron volts (eV) of energy and
              can ionize molecules and break chemical bonds. Non-ionizing radiation lacks
              enough energy to cause ionization; it includes electric fields, magnetic fields,
              and optical radiation.
                  In space, there are three primary sources of radiation: galactic cosmic
              rays, solar energetic particles, and trapped radiation. Cosmic rays are high-
              energy particles that originate outside the solar system. They can arise from
              cosmic events such as supernovae and mainly consist of protons and alpha
              particles. Particles from our sun include protons and heavier ions emitted
              during solar flares and coronal mass ejections. These particles can reach
              very high speeds and present a serious risk to astronauts and spacecraft.
              Lastly, spacecraft and astronauts may be affected by charged particles
              trapped by Earth’s magnetic field.
                  Our planet is surrounded by two doughnut-shaped regions of intense
              radiation called the Van Allen belts, formed by the interaction between the
              solar wind (see “Solar Wind” on page 31) and Earth’s magnetic field. The
              belts consist of multiple dynamic layers of trapped particles, including high-
              energy electrons and protons. They can pose hazards to both satellites and
              astronauts due to the high levels of energetic particles they contain.

              Damage to Electronics
              Ionizing radiation in space can have a significant effect on a spacecraft’s
              electronics and materials. Long-term exposure can damage electronic com-
              ponents, leading to threshold voltage shifts, increased leakage currents, and
              reduced performance or failure of semiconductors. As a result, solar cells
              experience substantial performance degradation over time.
                   Closely related to radiation exposure is the phenomenon of dielectric
              charging, which occurs when radiation interacts with dielectric materials,
              causing the accumulation of electric charge within them. Dielectric materi-
              als are electrical insulators that don’t conduct current but can store electric
              fields through polarization, in which an external electric field causes charges
              within the material to shift.

                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   29
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                         In addition to these long-term effects, radiation can cause single-event
                   effects (SEEs), which are temporary or permanent disruptions in electronic
                   systems triggered by a high-energy particle hitting a sensitive region of a mi-
                   croelectronic device. Beyond bit flips in memory, SEEs can induce unde-
                   sired processor behavior such as unexpected resets, logic errors, or disrup-
                   tions in command flow, potentially leading to mission-critical failures. Other
                   examples include latch-ups, where a short-circuit is created within a semicon-
                   ductor, and burnouts, where components are permanently damaged.
                         SEEs are particularly significant for modern spacecraft, which rely on
                   high-density, small-feature electronics. Mitigation techniques such as error-
                   correcting codes, redundant systems, and radiation-hardened components
                   can help maintain their reliability.

                   Other Effects
                   Radiation can degrade materials other than electronics. It can weaken space-
                   craft materials by causing discoloration or molecular changes, making them
                   brittle. Mission planners can mitigate these effects through shielding or by
                   reducing the time spent in high-radiation zones like the Van Allen belts.
                        Radiation can also interact with spacecraft materials to produce lower-
                   energy, secondary radiation, adding to the risk posed to both electronics
                   and human occupants.


                   Space Weather
                   In space, weather phenomena driven by the sun can interact with Earth’s
                   magnetic field and atmosphere in ways that impact both space and ground
                   systems, causing disruptions in radio communication links and power grids
                   and damage to electronic devices.
                        Agencies such as NASA, NOAA, and ESA continuously monitor the sun
                   to measure and predict space weather conditions. You can find up-to-date
                   information on current weather conditions in space on the websites of the
                   NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center (https://www.swpc.noaa.gov) and the
                   ESA Space Weather Network (https://swe.ssa.esa.int/current-space-weather).

                   Sunspots and the Solar Cycle
                   Two closely related phenomena, sunspots and the solar cycle, occur on the
                   sun’s surface and affect its activity. Sunspots are dark, cooler areas of the
                   sun’s surface that form in places where the magnetic field is more potent
                   and blocks some heat from reaching the surface. (Of course, even these
                   cooler areas still reach temperatures around 3,600 degrees Celsius, or 6,500
                   degrees Fahrenheit.) Sunspot activity varies with the solar magnetic cycle,
                   which completes approximately every 11 years. There are the fewest sunspots
                   when the solar cycle reaches its minimum and the most when it reaches its
                   maximum.




30    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

              Solar Wind
              The sun’s outermost corona layer continuously releases a stream of charged
              particles called the solar wind. This plasma stream primarily consists of elec-
              trons and protons from hydrogen nuclei, although it is about 10 percent al-
              pha particles and has smaller amounts of heavier ions. Depending on solar
              conditions, the wind typically reaches speeds ranging from 300 to 750 km/s
              (about 185 to 465 mi/s). While the particle temperature varies, it can reach
              up to around 1 million degrees Celsius (1.8 million degrees Fahrenheit).
                   Although Earth’s magnetic field protects us from most of the particles
              carried by the solar wind, they can enter in greater numbers near the poles.
              The interaction between these particles and the magnetic field produces
              auroras, mesmerizing natural light displays characterized by dynamic pat-
              terns of brilliant color visible in high-latitude regions. It can also trigger
              other space weather phenomena, such as geomagnetic storms and radio
              blackouts.

              Solar Flares
              Solar flares are powerful bursts of electromagnetic radiation that typically
              originate in regions of intense magnetic activity around sunspots. They are
              among the most energetic events in the solar system and can have a consid-
              erable impact on the space environment.
                   Solar flares occur when twisted magnetic field lines suddenly realign
              and release stored magnetic energy. These events can last from minutes to
              hours, depending on the amount of energy released. When energy stored in
              the magnetic field is released during a flare, it heats solar material to tens of
              millions of degrees Celsius and causes the emission of radiation across the
              electromagnetic spectrum, from radio waves to gamma rays.
                   Scientists classify solar flares based on their X-ray intensity in the 0.1
              to 0.8 nanometer (nm) band. The most powerful are X-class flares, capable
              of causing global radio blackouts and long-lasting radiation storms. M-class
              flares, of medium intensity, can cause localized disruptions. C-, B-, and
              A-class flares are progressively weaker events with minimal to no effect on
              Earth.

              Coronal Mass Ejections
              Coronal mass ejections (CMEs) are eruptions of large amounts of plasma
              and magnetic field from the sun’s corona. While solar flares and CMEs of-
              ten occur together, they are distinct phenomena: Whereas solar flares are lo-
              calized bursts of electromagnetic radiation capable of traveling at the speed
              of light, CMEs consist of billions of tons of magnetized plasma propelled at
              lower speeds, typically between 250 km/s and 3,000 km/s.
                   Without the protection of Earth’s magnetic field, astronauts and space-
              craft can accumulate high doses of radiation when hit by a CME. In the
              outer layers of the atmosphere, especially the ionosphere, CMEs can change
              how signals propagate, causing delays and rapid fluctuations in amplitude
              and phase. Positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) systems allow for de-
              termining an object’s position, guiding its movement, and synchronizing

                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   31
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   time-based operations. PNT systems like GPS rely on satellite signals to
                   broadcast information. CMEs lower the accuracy of these systems and can
                   cause blackouts in radio communication, especially between 3 and 30 MHz.


                   Temperatures
                   In the previous chapter, we mentioned that extreme temperatures in space
                   can pose a significant risk to spacecraft if not carefully considered and de-
                   signed for. For example, on the surface of the ISS, materials exposed to di-
                   rect sunlight can reach temperatures of up to 120 degrees Celsius (248 de-
                   grees Fahrenheit), well above the standard rating of many components and
                   materials we use on Earth. By contrast, when in the shade or far from the
                   sun, spacecraft can experience temperatures as low as –150 degrees Celsius
                   (–238 degrees Fahrenheit).
                        Prolonged exposure to such cold can cause components to fail or ma-
                   terials to become brittle and crack. Moreover, spacecraft often transition
                   quickly between sunlight and shadow, causing rapid thermal cycling. This
                   can further stress materials, leading to failure over time.
                        It can be challenging to manage temperatures inside and on the surface
                   of a spacecraft because of the lack of convection in space (discussed further
                   in the next section). Before launch, a spacecraft undergoes thermal cycling
                   to ensure that materials are “baked out,” meaning that volatile compounds
                   have been removed, and to test the robustness of the thermal control sys-
                   tem. To minimize heat transfer and protect components, multilayer insula-
                   tion (MLI) consisting of materials such as Kapton and Mylar is used. Interior
                   temperatures can be stabilized using radiators, which dissipate heat by radi-
                   ating it into space, and active heaters.


                   Vacuums
                   A vacuum is an area devoid of matter. In the context of outer space, the
                   term refers to the nearly empty regions between celestial bodies. These re-
                   gions contain very few particles and traces of gas, so their pressure is ex-
                   tremely low compared to Earth’s atmosphere. In such conditions, materials
                   can release trapped gases in a process called outgassing, which may damage
                   or degrade components.
                       Another challenge related to vacuums is that, in space, convection can-
                   not occur. This makes thermal management more complex, as spacecraft
                   must instead rely on radiative cooling. Without convection, heat cannot be
                   evenly distributed across surfaces, which can lead to localized overheating or
                   cooling, so engineers must carefully consider thermal design to ensure more
                   uniform heat distribution. The absence of convection also complicates the
                   storage and distribution of the liquid propellants that many spacecraft rely
                   on for orbit control thrusters.
                       On the positive side, without an atmosphere, spacecraft don’t ex-
                   perience aerodynamic drag, allowing engineers to design structures that
                   wouldn’t function under atmospheric conditions or in stronger gravita-
                   tional environments.

32    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

              Atmospheric Effects
              Earth’s atmosphere comprises five main layers, each with its own charac-
              teristics. The troposphere, the densest layer, extends from the surface to a
              height of about 12 km (7.5 miles). Most weather phenomena occur here.
              Above it is the stratosphere, extending to about 50 km (31 miles) and contain-
              ing the ozone layer, which protects the surface from most harmful ultravi-
              olet radiation. Above this, extending up to about 85 km (53 miles), is the
              mesosphere, the coldest of all layers and the region where most meteors burn
              up. The thermosphere extends from the mesosphere up to between 500 and
              1,000 km (about 310 to 620 miles) above Earth’s surface and is character-
              ized by increasing temperatures with altitude. The ionosphere, a zone of ion-
              ized particles extending from roughly 60 km to 1,000 km (37 to 620 miles)
              or higher, lies mainly within this region; this is where the auroral phenom-
              ena described in “Solar Wind” on page 31 occur. Beyond the thermosphere
              is the exosphere, the outermost layer of the atmosphere, which gradually tran-
              sitions into outer space.
                   Many satellites operate within the exosphere to lessen the impact of
              atomic oxygen, which can erode materials such as solar cells through chem-
              ical reactions. Oxidation can penetrate more deeply into spacecraft struc-
              tures than may be expected.
                   The adverse effects of atmospheric trace gases decrease at higher alti-
              tudes. To further mitigate their impact, spacecraft designers must consider
              protective measures and select appropriate materials for components ex-
              posed to the LEO environment. You can find more information about the
              different orbits and their challenges and use cases in Chapter 1.


              Micrometeoroids
              Micrometeoroids are tiny particles traveling through space at very high
              speeds. These particles can cause surface degradation over time, eroding
              spacecraft exteriors, mirrors, lenses, and sensors. Repeated impacts gradu-
              ally wear down materials, and even microscopic particles can compromise
              delicate instruments. Beyond surface wear, micrometeoroid strikes can
              puncture insulation layers, propellant tanks, pressurized vessels, and essen-
              tial components such as batteries and coolant lines.
                   High-velocity impacts can also cause small fragments to break off the
              spacecraft’s surface, potentially altering its attitude or orbit. Even a single
              impact can cause a loss of precision. Astronauts performing extravehicular
              activities face additional dangers from micrometeoroids and require special-
              ized spacesuits designed to withstand these impacts, using advanced protec-
              tive materials such as ceramic-fiber woven barriers and multilayer flexible
              fabrics.


              Space Debris
              Space debris consists of human-made objects found in Earth’s orbit that
              no longer serve a purpose, including defunct satellites, abandoned rocket


                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   33
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   stages, and mission-related fragments. It is mainly concentrated in LEO, but
                   some also exists in higher orbits. Debris can range in size from tiny paint
                   flakes to large rocket bodies over 10 meters long. When traveling at speeds
                   up to 28,000 km/h, even small pieces of debris can pose a serious threat to
                   operational satellites and spacecraft.
                        The total mass of all space objects in Earth’s orbit exceeds 13,500 tons.
                   Estimates suggest that there are approximately 40,500 objects larger than
                   10 cm, 1.1 million between 1 cm and 10 cm, and 130 million between 1 mm
                   and 1 cm. The increasing amount of debris has led to concerns about the
                   long-term sustainability of space activities and the potential for a cascade
                   effect when collisions occur.
                        The Kessler syndrome is a theoretical scenario in which the density of
                   objects in LEO becomes so high that collisions between them lead to an
                   exponential increase in space debris. It was proposed by NASA scientists
                   Donald J. Kessler and Burton G. Cour-Palais in 1978. The key idea is that
                   as collisions occur, they generate more debris, thereby increasing the like-
                   lihood of future collisions. This risk poses a significant threat to satellites,
                   space stations, and launch activities and could render certain orbital regions
                   unusable for spaceflight.
                        A critical threshold is reached when new debris is created faster than
                   natural processes remove it. Simulations suggest that the near-Earth envi-
                   ronment may already be approaching instability, with debris generation out-
                   pacing removal mechanisms such as atmospheric drag. In the final stage of
                   the Kessler syndrome process, referred to as space congestion, it is estimated
                   that every satellite in LEO will experience an average of one collision with
                   debris per year. It is unclear when (or if) this will happen, but if space ac-
                   tivities continue to increase and orbital space becomes more geopolitically
                   contested, it will likely be only a matter of time before a large-scale cleanup
                   of Earth’s orbits becomes necessary.
                        Now that you have an understanding of the many potential adversarial
                   and nonadversarial threats to space systems, let’s quickly review a few of the
                   tools that are available to protect against these hostile actions.


     Risk Assessment with the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
                   As you’ve learned, the risks to space systems are diverse and complex, rang-
                   ing from intercepted satellite communications to malicious commands in-
                   jected into ground station networks. Moreover, assessing risk is particularly
                   challenging in the space domain due to uncertainties associated with envi-
                   ronmental factors (such as solar flares) and geopolitical dynamics (such as
                   state-sponsored cyberattacks).
                        To account for these variables, operators must perform risk assessments
                   that consider both the likelihood of a threat occurring and the potential
                   consequences if it succeeds. Risk management frameworks such as the Na-
                   tional Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity Frame-
                   work (CSF) 2.0 provide structured approaches for this task.



34    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   The CSF defines six core functions:
                   Govern Guides an organization’s cybersecurity strategy and oversight,
                   supporting and informing the other five functions.
                   Identify Involves understanding the organization’s assets, risk envi-
                   ronment, governance structure, business context, and risk management
                   strategy.
                   Protect Includes access control, awareness and training, data security,
                   maintenance, and protective technologies to safeguard systems.
                   Detect Focuses on anomaly and event detection, continuous monitor-
                   ing, and formal processes to identify incidents promptly.
                   Respond Encompasses response planning, effective communication,
                   analysis, mitigation actions, and lessons learned.
                   Recover Emphasizes recovery planning, organizational improvements,
                   and communication to restore operations after an incident.
                  The CSF also defines four implementation tiers that describe increasing
              levels of cybersecurity risk management maturity:
                   Partial Risk awareness is limited and processes may lack consistency.
                   Risk-informed Risk awareness begins to inform decision-making; risk
                   management practices are approved by management but may not be
                   fully standardized across the organization.
                   Repeatable The organization has established standardized practices
                   and policies.
                   Adaptive Continuous improvement is driven by threat intelligence and
                   lessons learned.
                   Organizations can assess their current tier, set a target tier aligned with
              strategic objectives, and follow guidance, such as strengthening governance,
              improving metrics, and embedding feedback loops, to progress over time.
                   CSF profiles represent an organization’s alignment of its risk assessment
              with its business needs and priorities. The current profile captures the orga-
              nization’s existing cybersecurity posture, while the target profile describes
              desired states that address gaps or new objectives. If a gap exists between
              the current and target profiles, organizations can find a way to bridge it by
              focusing on the most critical areas first.
                   Organizations can use the CSF to prioritize issues for mitigation. For
              example, they might do the following:
                   •    Implement encryption protocols to secure data transmissions.
                   •    Deploy intrusion detection systems at ground stations.
                   •    Design fail-safe mechanisms that prevent unauthorized commands
                        from affecting satellite operations.
                 Ongoing monitoring and periodic reassessment keep the risk assess-
              ment process dynamic and responsive to emerging threats.

                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   35
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

     Threat Modeling with OWASP Threat Dragon
                   Threat modeling is the process of systematically identifying and addressing
                   potential security threats to a system throughout its life cycle. Unlike risk as-
                   sessment, which evaluates the likelihood and impact of known risks, threat
                   modeling is proactive; it aims to anticipate how a system might be attacked
                   and to design protections early in development. The results of threat model-
                   ing can even serve as inputs to a risk assessment, helping prioritize risks and
                   determine mitigation strategies.
                        A typical threat modeling process begins by defining the system in ques-
                   tion, then identifying potential threats. Well-known frameworks such as
                   STRIDE (which categorizes threats into categories such as spoofing and tam-
                   pering) or PASTA (a more risk-oriented approach) can serve as guides. Next,
                   the organization should plan mitigations and review the model iteratively to
                   identify any remaining gaps.
                        It can be helpful to visualize this process using tools like OWASP Threat
                   Dragon, which allows users to create diagrams of a system’s components
                   and trust boundaries. As an example, we’ll walk through a threat model of a
                   space system using Threat Dragon and the Space Attack Research and Tactic
                   Analysis (SPARTA) framework. SPARTA is a space-specific threat identifica-
                   tion and response framework which we will discuss in more detail in “Stan-
                   dards and Frameworks” on page 292.
                        To get started with Threat Dragon, navigate to https://owasp.org/www
                   -project-threat-dragon/ and choose your preferred deployment method. You
                   can install it locally or run it in a Docker container. Next, either start the
                   web server or run the installed application to access a menu where you can
                   open an existing threat model, create a new one, or explore a sample.
                        We encourage you to check out the included sample threat models to
                   get a sense of the tool’s capabilities before you create your own model. The
                   demo threat model in Figure 2-2 shows a web application with background
                   workers and a message queue.




36    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik




              Figure 2-2: A demo threat diagram

                   On the left side of the screen, you’ll see the components you can in-
              clude in a diagram. A process typically represents something internal to the
              system and within its control. A store represents a database, such as those
              used in a ground station to store telemetry. Actors indicate someone or some-
              thing interacting with the system or software. In our case, this could be a
              spacecraft controller. Data flow is represented using arrows between compo-
              nents, which default to unidirectional but can be changed to bidirectional.




                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   37
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                        You can draw trust or privilege boundaries as either boxes or lines. These
                   boundaries delineate areas where privileges begin or end and where entry
                   or exit points for your application or system exist. Finally, the descriptive
                   text box lets you add additional annotations or explanations. If, for exam-
                   ple, you want to keep a diagram focused on a specific type of threat or data
                   flow, you might leave some components out of scope and use a text box to
                   explain your reasoning.
                        Now that you know the components you can use in a diagram, create a
                   new threat model using the dialog shown in Figure 2-3.




                   Figure 2-3: Creating a new threat model

                        Provide a title for your new model and fill in the names of the owner
                   and eventual reviewer. Next, write a concise, high-level description of the
                   system you want to model. Choose the type of diagram to create (in this
                   case, STRIDE), and give the diagram a name and a brief description. You
                   can add multiple diagrams to one threat model. Save the information, then
                   click Close to return to your threat modeling project overview.
                        Click the STRIDE diagram to open it for editing. You should see an
                   empty diagram, as in Figure 2-4.




                   Figure 2-4: An empty STRIDE diagram




38    Chapter 2
The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik

                   Now it’s time to model your space system. In Figure 2-5, we’ve created
              a simple example to get you started. Begin by placing the processes and ac-
              tors, then connect them with data flows and add the trust boundaries.




              Figure 2-5: Beginning a diagram

                  Once you’ve created a diagram, you can choose a component and add
              a new threat to it. We’ve chosen to add compromise of our ground station
              infrastructure (Figure 2-6). If you leave the status as “not mitigated,” Threat
              Dragon will highlight it in red until you mitigate it.
                  From the overview menu, you can create a report using the button at
              the bottom right. The report provides a summary of the identified threats,
              images of the diagrams, and a table listing the threats associated with each
              element.




                                                                                 The Threat Landscape   39
     The Spacecraft Hacker's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 8/14/26 by Andrzej Olchawa and Milenko Starcik




                   Figure 2-6: Adding a new threat

                        This covers the basics of creating a space system threat model in OWASP
                   Threat Dragon. In threat modeling, there is no single correct approach. Dif-
                   ferent methods can be applied, and you can adapt tools like Threat Dragon
                   to fit your specific application.


     Conclusion
                   The ever-evolving space threat landscape challenges organizations, govern-
                   ments, and individuals across the industry. As this chapter has shown, the
                   increasing sophistication, frequency, and diversity of threats, from physical
                   attacks to ransomware to nation-state attacks, underscore the urgency for
                   proactive, adaptive, and intelligence-driven defense strategies. Understand-
                   ing the motivations of threat actors, anticipating emerging threat vectors,
                   and fostering a culture of security awareness are no longer optional. Going
                   forward, sustained collaboration across sectors, continuous monitoring, and
                   investment in resilient and innovative security technologies will be essential
                   to maintaining the safety and sustainability of space operations.




40    Chapter 2
