Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress




                         IDENTIFICATION AND
                                            3
                           AUTHENTICATION



                     When you’re developing security mea-
                    sures, whether they’re specific mechanisms
                  or entire infrastructures, identification and
               authentication are key concepts. In short,
       identification makes a claim about who or what some-
       one or something is, and authentication establishes
       whether this claim is true. You can see these processes
       taking place daily in a wide variety of ways.
           One common example of an identification and authentication transac-
       tion is the use of payment cards that require a personal identification num-
       ber (PIN). When you swipe the magnetic strip on the card, you are stating
       that you are the person indicated on that card. At this point, you’ve given
       your identification but nothing more. When you’re asked to enter the PIN
       associated with the card, you complete the authentication portion of the
       transaction, proving that you are the legitimate cardholder.
           Some of the identification and authentication methods that we use daily
       are particularly fragile, meaning they depend largely on the honesty and dili-
       gence of those involved in the transaction. If you show your ID card to buy
       alcohol, for example, you’re asking people to trust that your ID is genuine
             Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

                    and accurate; they can’t authenticate it unless they have access to the system
                    that maintains the ID in question. We also depend on the competence of
                    the person or system performing the authentication; they must be capable
                    not only of performing the act of authentication but also of detecting false
                    or fraudulent activity.
                         You can use several methods for identification and authentication, from
                    requiring simple usernames and passwords to implementing purpose-built
                    hardware tokens that serve to establish your identity in multiple ways. In this
                    chapter, I’ll discuss several of these methods and explore their uses.


     Identification
                    Identification, as you just learned, is simply an assertion of who we are.
                    This may include who we claim to be as people, who a system claims to be
                    over the network, or who the originating party of an email claims to be.
                    Let’s look at some methods for determining identity and examine their
                    trustworthiness.


                    Who We Claim to Be
                    Who we claim to be is a tenuous concept in the best case. We can identify
                    ourselves by our full names, shortened versions of our names, nicknames,
                    account numbers, usernames, ID cards, fingerprints, or DNA samples. Un-
                    fortunately, with a few exceptions, such methods of identification are not
                    unique, and even some of the supposedly unique methods of identification,
                    such as fingerprints, can be duplicated.
                         Who we claim to be can, in many cases, be subject to change. For exam-
                    ple, many women change their last names when they get married. In addi-
                    tion, we can generally easily change logical forms of identification, such as
                    account numbers or usernames. Even physical identifiers, such as height,
                    weight, skin color, and eye color, can change. One of the most crucial fac-
                    tors to realize is that a claim of identity alone is not enough.


                    Identity Verification
                    Identity verification is a step beyond identification, but it’s still a step short of
                    authentication, which I’ll discuss in the next section. When you are asked to
                    show a driver’s license, Social Security card, birth certificate, or other sim-
                    ilar form of identification, this is generally for verification of identity, not
                    authentication. This process is the rough equivalent of someone claiming
                    the identity John Smith, and you asking whether the person is indeed John
                    Smith and being satisfied with an answer of “Sure, I am” from the person
                    (plus a little paperwork).
                         We can take the example a bit further and validate the form of identifi-
                    cation (say, a passport) against a database holding an additional copy of the
                    information that it contains, matching the photograph and physical specifi-
                    cations with the person standing in front of us. This may get us a bit closer


30   Chapter 3
    Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

           to ensuring that we have correctly identified the person, but it still does not
           qualify as authentication. We may have validated the status of the ID itself,
           and we know that the person meets the general specifications of the person
           to whom it was originally issued, but we have taken no steps to prove that the
           person is really the right one. The more we trend toward verification and
           away from authentication, the weaker our controls are.
               Computer systems also use identity verification. When you send an
           email, the identity you provide is considered true; the system rarely takes
           any additional steps to authenticate you. Such security gaps contribute to
           the huge amount of spam traffic, which Cisco’s Talos Intelligence Group
           estimates to have accounted for more than 90 percent of all email sent
           in 2024.13


           Identity Falsification
           As I’ve discussed, methods of identification are subject to change. As such,
           they are also subject to falsification. Minors often use fake IDs to get into
           bars or nightclubs, while criminals and terrorists might use them for more-
           nefarious tasks. You could use some methods of identification, such as birth
           certificates, to obtain additional forms of identification, such as Social Secu-
           rity cards or driver’s licenses, thus strengthening a false identity.
                Identity theft based on falsified information is a major concern today;
           nearly 300,000 identity thefts per quarter were reported by US consumers
           in 2024.14 Unfortunately, this type of attack is common and easy to execute.
           Given a minimal amount of information (usually, a name, address, and So-
           cial Security number are sufficient), it is possible to impersonate someone
           just enough to be able to conduct a variety of transactions in their name,
           such as opening a line of credit. Such crimes occur because many activities
           lack authentication requirements. Although most people think that identity
           verification is sufficient, verification is easy to bypass by using falsified forms
           of identification.
                Many of the same difficulties exist in computer systems and environ-
           ments. For example, sending an email from a falsified email address is en-
           tirely possible. Spammers use this tactic on a regular basis. I’ll address such
           issues at greater length in Chapter 16.


Authentication
           In cybersecurity, authentication is the set of methods used to establish
           whether a claim of identity is true. Note that authentication does not decide
           what the party being authenticated is permitted to do; this is a separate task,
           known as authorization. I’ll discuss authorization in Chapter 4.


           Factors
           Authentication is based on several factors: something you know, something
           you are, something you have, something you do, and where you are. When


                                                                        Identification and Authentication   31
             Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

                    you’re attempting to authenticate a claim of identity, you’ll want to use as
                    many factors as possible. The more factors you use, the more positive your
                    results will be.
                         Something you know, a common authentication factor, includes passwords
                    or PINs. However, this factor is somewhat weak because if the information
                    on which the factor depends is exposed, your authentication method may
                    no longer be unique.
                         Something you are is a factor based on the relatively unique physical char-
                    acteristics of an individual, often referred to as biometrics. Although biomet-
                    rics can include simple attributes such as height, weight, hair color, or eye
                    color, these aren’t usually distinctive enough to make very secure identifiers.
                    Complex identifiers such as fingerprints, patterns in the iris or retina, or fa-
                    cial characteristics are more common. These are a bit stronger than, say, a
                    password, because forging or stealing a copy of a physical identifier is some-
                    what more difficult, although not impossible. There is some question as to
                    whether biometrics truly count as an authentication factor or whether they
                    constitute only verification. I’ll discuss this in greater depth in “Biometrics”
                    on page 35.
                         Something you have is a factor generally based on physical possession, al-
                    though it can extend to some logical concepts. Common examples are au-
                    tomatic teller machine (ATM) cards, state or federally issued identity cards,
                    or software-based security tokens, as shown in Figure 3-1. Some institutions,
                    such as banks, have begun to use access to logical devices, such as cell phones
                    or email accounts, as authentication methods as well.




                    Figure 3-1: Sending a security token
                    to a mobile phone is a common
                    authentication method.

32   Chapter 3
Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

            This factor can vary in strength depending on the implementation. If
       you wanted to use a security token sent to a device that doesn’t belong to
       you, you’d need to steal the device to falsify the authentication method or
       otherwise compromise the mechanism being used. On the other hand, a
       security token sent to an email address would be much easier to intercept,
       and you’d have a measure of considerably less strength.
            Something you do, sometimes considered a variation of something you
       are, is a factor based on the actions or behaviors of an individual. This may
       include an analysis of the individual’s gait or handwriting or the time delay
       between keystrokes while typing a passphrase. These factors present a strong
       authentication method and are difficult to falsify. They do, however, have
       the potential to incorrectly reject legitimate users at a higher rate than some
       of the other factors.
            Where you are is a geographically based authentication factor. This factor
       operates differently than the others, as it requires a person to be present at
       a specific location. For example, when changing an ATM PIN, some banks
       require you to go to a branch, where you will then be required to present
       your ID and account number. If the bank allows the PIN to be reset online
       or over the phone, an attacker could change your PIN remotely and proceed
       to clean out your account. Although potentially less useful than some of the
       other factors, this factor is difficult to counter without completely subverting
       the system performing the authentication.


       Multifactor Authentication
       Multifactor authentication (MFA) uses one or more of the factors discussed in
       the preceding section. When you’re using only two factors, this practice is
       also sometimes called two-factor authentication (2FA).
            Let’s return to the ATM example because it illustrates MFA well. In this
       case, you use something you know (your PIN) and something you have (your
       ATM card). Your ATM card serves as both an authentication factor and a
       form of identification. Another example of MFA is writing checks. In this
       case, you’re using something you have (the checks themselves) and some-
       thing you do (signing them). Here, the two factors involved in writing a
       check are rather weak, so sometimes you will see a third factor, a fingerprint,
       used with them.
            Depending on the factors selected, you can build stronger or weaker
       MFA schemes particular to each situation. In some cases, certain methods
       may be more difficult to defeat but impractical to implement. For example,
       DNA makes for a strong authentication method but is not practical in most
       situations. In Chapter 1, I said that your security should be proportional
       to what you’re protecting. You could certainly install iris scanners on every
       credit card terminal, but this would be expensive, impractical, and poten-
       tially upsetting to customers.




                                                                    Identification and Authentication   33
             Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

                    Mutual Authentication
                    In mutual authentication, both parties in a transaction authenticate each
                    other. These parties are typically software based. In the standard one-way
                    authentication process, the client authenticates to the server. In mutual
                    authentication, not only does the client authenticate to the server, but the
                    server authenticates to the client as well. Mutual authentication often relies
                    on digital certificates, which I’ll discuss in Chapter 6. Briefly, both the client
                    and the server would have a certificate to authenticate the other.
                        When you don’t perform mutual authentication, you leave yourself
                    open to impersonation attacks, often referred to as man-in-the-middle attacks.
                    In this attack, the attacker, located between the client and the server, im-
                    personates the server to the client, and the client to the server, as shown in
                    Figure 3-2. This is accomplished by intercepting and forwarding the traffic
                    that would usually flow directly between the client and the server.


                                            Original
                                           connection

                        Client                                  Server


                        Attacker’s                            Attacker’s
                       connection                            connection

                                          Attacker

                    Figure 3-2: A man-in-the-middle attack

                         This circumvention is typically possible because the attacker needs to
                    subvert or falsify authentication only from the client to the server. If you
                    implement mutual authentication, this attack becomes considerably more
                    difficult because the attacker would have to falsify two authentications.
                         You can also combine mutual authentication with MFA, although the
                    latter generally takes place only on the client side. MFA from the server back
                    to the client would be not only technically challenging but also impractical in
                    most environments because it would require some technical heavy lifting on
                    the client side, potentially on the part of the user. You’d likely lose a signifi-
                    cant amount of productivity.


     Common Identification and Authentication Methods
                    I’ll conclude this discussion by exploring three common identification and
                    authentication methods in detail: passwords, biometrics, and hardware
                    tokens.




34   Chapter 3
Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

       Passwords
       Passwords are familiar to most of us who use computers regularly. When
       combined with a username, a password will generally allow you access to
       a computer system, an application, a phone, or a similar device. Although
       they’re only a single factor of authentication, passwords can represent a rela-
       tively high level of security when constructed and implemented properly.
            People often describe certain passwords as being strong, but a better
       descriptive term might be complex. If you construct a password that uses
       lowercase letters only and is eight characters long, you can use a password-
       cracking utility to quickly reveal it, as discussed in Chapter 1. Adding char-
       acter sets to the password makes it increasingly difficult to figure out. If you
       use uppercase letters, lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols, you’ll end
       up with a password that is potentially more difficult to remember, such as
       $sU&qw!3, but much harder to crack.
            In addition to constructing strong passwords, you need to practice good
       password hygiene. Don’t reuse or share your password. Don’t write it down
       and post it on your monitor; doing so completely defeats the purpose of hav-
       ing a password in the first place. Applications called password managers can
       help us manage all our logins and passwords for multiple accounts, some as
       locally installed software, and others as web or mobile device applications.
       Many arguments can be made for and against such tools; some people think
       keeping all your passwords in one place is risky, but when used carefully,
       these managers can help you maintain good password hygiene.
            Another common problem is the manual synchronization of passwords—
       in short, using the same password everywhere. If you use the same password
       for your email, for your login at work, and for your online knitting discus-
       sion forum, you are putting the security of all accounts in the hands of those
       system owners. If any one of them is compromised, all your accounts be-
       come vulnerable; all an attacker needs to do to access the others is look up
       your account name on the internet to find your other accounts and log in
       using your default password. By the time the attacker gets into your email
       account, the game is over because an attacker can generally use it to reset
       account credentials for any other accounts you have.


       Biometrics
       Although some biometric identifiers may be more difficult to falsify than
       others, this is only because of the limitations of today’s technology. At some
       point in the future, we’ll need to develop more-robust biometric characteris-
       tics to measure or stop using biometrics as an authentication mechanism.




                                                                    Identification and Authentication   35
             Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

                    Use of Biometrics
                    Biometrics-equipped devices are becoming increasingly common and inex-
                    pensive. You can find a wide selection for less than $20. It pays to research
                    such devices carefully before you depend on them for security, as some of
                    the cheaper versions are easy to bypass.
                         You can use biometric systems in two ways. You can use them to
                    verify the identity claim someone has made, as discussed earlier, or you
                    can reverse the process and use biometrics as a method of identification.
                    This process is commonly used by law enforcement agencies to identify the
                    owner of fingerprints left on various objects. This can be a time-consuming
                    effort considering the sheer size of the fingerprint libraries these organiza-
                    tions have.
                         To use a biometric system in either manner, you need to put the user
                    through some sort of enrollment process. Enrollment records the user’s
                    chosen biometric characteristic (for instance, making a copy of a finger-
                    print) and saves it in a system. Processing the characteristic may also include
                    noting elements that appear in certain parts of the image, known as minutiae
                    (Figure 3-3).




                    Figure 3-3: Biometric minutiae

                         You can use the minutiae later to match the characteristic with the user.

                    Characteristics of Biometric Factors
                    Biometric factors are defined by seven characteristics: universality,
                    uniqueness, permanence, collectability, performance, acceptability, and
                    circumvention.15
                        Universality means you should be able to find your chosen biometric
                    characteristic in the majority of people expected to enroll in the system.
                    For instance, although you might be able to use a scar as an identifier, you
                    can’t guarantee that everyone will have a scar. Even if you choose a common
                    characteristic such as a fingerprint, you should take into account that some
                    people may not have an index finger on their right hand and be prepared to
                    compensate for this.
                        Uniqueness is a measure of the distinctiveness of a characteristic
                    among individuals. For example, if you choose to use height or weight

36   Chapter 3
Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

       as a biometric identifier, you’d stand a good chance of finding several peo-
       ple in any given group who have the same height or weight. You should try
       to select characteristics with a high degree of uniqueness, such as DNA or
       iris patterns, but even these could be duplicated, whether intentionally or
       otherwise. For example, identical twins have the same DNA, and an attacker
       could replicate a fingerprint.
            Permanence tests how well a characteristic resists change over time and
       with advancing age. If you choose a factor that can easily vary, such as height,
       weight, or hand geometry, you’ll eventually find yourself unable to authen-
       ticate a legitimate user. It’s better to use factors such as fingerprints, which
       are unlikely to change without deliberate action.
            Collectability measures how easy it is to acquire a characteristic. Most
       commonly used biometrics, such as fingerprints, are relatively easy to ac-
       quire, which is one reason they are common. On the other hand, a DNA
       sample is more difficult to acquire because the user must provide a genetic
       sample to enroll and to authenticate again later.
            Performance measures how well a given system functions based on fac-
       tors such as speed, accuracy, and error rate. I’ll discuss the performance of
       biometric systems at greater length later in this section.
            Acceptability is a measure of the level of acceptance of the characteristic
       by the users of the system. In general, systems that are slow, difficult to use,
       or awkward to use are less likely to be acceptable to the user.16 Systems that
       require users to remove their clothing, touch devices that have been repeat-
       edly used by others, or provide tissue or bodily fluids are unlikely to have a
       high degree of acceptability.
            Circumvention describes how easy it is to manipulate a system by using
       a falsified biometric identifier. The classic example of a circumvention at-
       tack against the fingerprint as a biometric identifier is the “gummy finger.”
       In this type of attack, a fingerprint is lifted from a surface and used to cre-
       ate a mold that the attacker uses to cast a positive image of the fingerprint
       in gelatin. Some biometric systems have secondary features specifically de-
       signed to defeat such attacks by measuring skin temperature, pulse, or pupil-
       lary response.

       Performance Measurement
       The performance of a biometric system can be measured in many ways, but
       a few primary metrics are particularly important. The false acceptance rate
       (FAR) and the false rejection rate (FRR) are two of these.17 The FAR measures
       the frequency of accepting a user who should be rejected. This is also called
       a false positive. The FRR measures how often we reject a legitimate user and
       is sometimes called a false negative.
            You want to avoid both of these situations in excess. You should aim for
       a balance between the two error types, known as an equal error rate (EER). If
       you plot both the FAR and the FRR on a graph, as I’ve done in Figure 3-4,
       the EER marks the point where the two lines intersect.




                                                                    Identification and Authentication   37
             Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress


                                              FAR                       FRR




                    Percent of FAR and FRR


                                                            ERR



                                                       Threshold

                    Figure 3-4: The equal error rate is the intersection
                    of the false acceptance rate and false rejection rate.

                                             We sometimes use EER to measure the accuracy of biometric systems.

                    Flaws in Biometric Systems
                    Biometric systems are prone to several common issues. As I mentioned
                    when discussing circumvention, it’s easy to forge some biometric identifiers.
                    Moreover, once they’re forged, it’s hard to re-enroll a user in the system. For
                    example, if you enroll a user with both index fingers and those fingerprints
                    are compromised, you could remove these from the system and enroll two
                    of the user’s other fingers. However, if you’ve already enrolled all their fin-
                    gers in the system, you’d have no means of re-enrolling them using fingers
                    at all. Depending on the system in question, you may be able to select a dif-
                    ferent set of minutiae for the same identifier, but this avoids the point of the
                    discussion, which is that biometric identifiers are finite.
                         This issue became tangible in 2015, when an attacker hacked the
                    United States Office of Personnel Management and stole the fingerprint
                    records of 5.6 million federal employees holding security clearances.18 Re-
                    percussions are still being felt a decade later, with legal proceedings still not
                    concluded.19
                         You also face possible privacy issues with the use of biometrics. When
                    you’re enrolled in a biometric system, you’re essentially giving away a copy
                    of the identifier, whether it’s a fingerprint, iris pattern, or DNA sample.
                    After that item has been entered into a computer system, you have little, if
                    any, control over what happens to it. We hope that once you are no longer
                    associated with the institution in question, the institution would destroy
                    such materials, but you have no way to guarantee this. In particular, in the
                    case of DNA sampling, the repercussions of surrendering genetic material
                    could affect you for the rest of your life.




38   Chapter 3
   Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

          Hardware Tokens
          A standard hardware token (Figure 3-5) is a small device, typically in the gen-
          eral form factor (size and shape) of a credit card or keychain fob. The sim-
          plest hardware tokens look identical to Universal Serial Bus (USB) flash
          drives and contain a certificate or unique identifier. They’re often called
          dongles. More-complex hardware tokens incorporate liquid-crystal displays
          (LCDs), keypads for entering passwords, biometric readers, wireless devices,
          and additional features to enhance security.




          Figure 3-5: Hardware tokens

               Many hardware tokens contain an internal clock that generates a code
          based on the device’s unique identifier, an input PIN or password, and other
          potential factors. Usually, the code is output to a display on the token and
          changes on a regular basis, often every 30 seconds. The infrastructure used
          to keep track of these tokens can predict what the proper output will be at
          any given time in order to authenticate the user.
               The simplest kind of hardware token represents only the something-you-
          have factor and is thus susceptible to theft and potential use by a knowledge-
          able criminal. Although these devices provide an increased level of security
          for the user’s accounts and aren’t generally useful without the associated ac-
          count credentials, you do need to remember to safeguard them.
               More-sophisticated hardware tokens could represent the something-you-
          know or something-you-are factors as well. They might require a PIN or fin-
          gerprint, which enhances the security of the device considerably; in addition
          to getting the hardware token, an attacker would need to either subvert the
          infrastructure that uses the device or extract the something-you-know or
          something-you-are factor from the legitimate owner of the device.


Summary
          Identification is an assertion of the identity of a party, whether it is a person,
          process, system, or other entity. Identification is only a claim of identity; it
          doesn’t say anything about any privileges that might be associated with the
          identity.


                                                                       Identification and Authentication   39
             Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

                         Authentication is the process used to validate whether the identity claim
                    is correct. This process is different from verification, which is a much weaker
                    way of testing someone’s identity.
                         When you perform authentication, you can use several factors. The
                    main factors are something you know, something you are, something you
                    have, something you do, and where you are. An authentication mechanism
                    that includes more than one factor is known as MFA. Using multiple factors
                    gives you a much stronger authentication mechanism than you might other-
                    wise have.
                         The common set of tools used for authentication includes passwords,
                    tokens, and biometric identifiers. Each has its own set of unique challenges
                    that you will need to deal with when you implement it as part of your set of
                    security controls.
                         In the next chapter, I’ll discuss the steps that take place after identifica-
                    tion and authentication: authorization and access control.


     Review Questions
                         1.   What authentication factors could a hardware token potentially
                              represent?
                         2.   What is the benefit of using a password manager to store passwords?
                              How might a user circumvent these benefits?
                         3.   What biometric characteristics might be affected as a person ages?
                         4.   What methods of personal identification might be easily falsi-
                              fied? What approaches are used to harden these methods against
                              falsification?
                         5.   Why are the various forms of common identification generally insuf-
                              ficient for authentication purposes?
                         6.   Using mutual authentication protects against what type of attack?
                         7.   What methods comprise the set of authentication factors? Give one
                              example for each.
                         8.   What purposes does MFA serve?
                         9.   What common forms of identification do we use as individuals in
                              our daily lives? List several.
                       10.    What are some cases where we might see identification substituted
                              for authentication?




40   Chapter 3
   Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress

Project #3: Hashing Passwords
          One of the authentication methods I discussed in this chapter is the use of
          passwords. How are passwords stored safely on your system so that they can
          be checked against the password you enter when you log in? What keeps an
          attacker from finding them and recovering them?
               Well, when you set a password on a system, the system doesn’t store the
          password itself, but a hash of the password. A hash function is a mathemat-
          ical operation that produces a value that can act like a fingerprint of the
          thing being hashed. I’ll come back to hashes in more detail in Chapter 6.
               When you log into the system, the password you type gets hashed in
          the same way as the stored version, and the two hashes are compared to
          see whether they match. If so, you’ve typed the correct password and are
          allowed to log in. In this way, the system never has to store your actual pass-
          word, where it could be vulnerable to attackers.
               To practice hashing passwords, you’ll use the CyberChef tool discussed
          in Chapter 1. You’ll also need a list of passwords to test. We’ll use the same
          ones from Project #1 in Chapter 1:
              •     Tr0ub4dor&3
              •     correcthorsebatterystaple
              •     password
              •     Jtx2NAg6GctawDF_diM_
               Fire up your browser and visit https://gchq.github.io/CyberChef/. In the
          upper-left corner, you’ll see a search field under Operations. Enter fork in
          this box, and you’ll see the Fork operation show up at the top of the list.
               Next, enter sha2 and drag the SHA2 operation over, right below Fork.
          In the SHA2 operation, click the Size drop-down and select 256. SHA-256 is
          a hashing algorithm frequently used for passwords.
               In the Input field on the right side, enter the value password. In the
          Output field, you should see the SHA-256 hash of the word password, which
          should look similar to the value in Figure 3-6.
               When given the same input, a hash function always produces the same
          output. To see this fact in action, click somewhere in the Output box and
          press ENTER to get a new line. Enter password again. You should now see a
          second line in the output box with an identical hash.
               Note one issue with this method of handling passwords: If two users
          have the same password, the system will produce the same stored hash. This
          would allow an attacker who had access to the stored hashes and knew one
          user’s password to realize that the second user had an identical password,
          making the stored password much less secure.




                                                                       Identification and Authentication   41
             Foundations of Cybersecurity, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/27/26 by Jason Andress




                    Figure 3-6: CyberChef showing hashed passwords

                         We can fix this situation, to some extent, by using a salt, an additional
                    value added to the password before it’s hashed to ensure that the hash pro-
                    duced is unique, even when the password is the same. For example, we could
                    add some variation of the username as a salt.
                         In the output box, add the value user1 to the front of the first line and
                    user2 to the front of the second line. You should now see two hashes, as the
                    input values are now different as a result of adding the salt. Play around a bit
                    more with the different example passwords, and different types and lengths
                    of salts, to see how they change the output. This is a somewhat simplified
                    example; modern operating systems use much stronger hashing algorithms
                    and salt mechanisms than those we looked at here.
                         To go even deeper, use CyberChef to answer the following questions:
                        •     What happens if you perform another SHA-256 operation on the
                              output of the first? Is two rounds of hashing more secure?
                        •     If an attacker could discover both the hashing algorithm and the
                              salt used, is there any way they could discover the password? (Hint:
                              Research rainbow tables.) How might you mitigate such an issue?
                        •     Using a salt makes this storage mechanism more secure. What
                              does a pepper do, and how does it impact the security of the stored
                              password?




42   Chapter 3
