                                                    2
                                    S TAT E- S P O N S O R E D
                                   F I N A N C I A L AT TAC K S




                               As long as banks have existed, people have
                               been trying to rob them. But until recently,
                              criminals had to physically enter the bank,
                           usually masked and armed, and use the threat
                    of violence to demand money. Today, that is no longer
                    the case. Over the past 10 years, the world has seen
                    many high-dollar bank compromises in which the rob-
                    ber never stepped foot on the premises.
                         Computing technology and the internet have allowed banking to move
                    from a brick-and-mortar access model, one that required customers to come
                    to the bank to access their funds, to a system made of bits and bytes. In pres-
                    ent times, we can remotely conduct banking from any internet-connected
                    device. In fact, banking is more secure than ever thanks to this technology.
                         Unfortunately, connectivity has also provided criminals with new
                    opportunities for theft. Banks today risk losing more money from a single




502147c02.indd 35                                                                                 11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                criminal operation than ever before. That’s because a brick-and-mortar
                                bank’s financial loss is limited to the funds on hand at the branch. Online
                                banking allows financial institutions to grant customers access to funds
                                beyond those available at one physical location. While this enables banks to
                                provide their customers with better service, it also means online attackers
                                can steal vast sums of money.
                                     Typical cybercriminals often don’t have the means—or the time—
                                required to execute attacks against financial institutions. Yet nation-state
                                attackers pose a significant threat to financial institutions, as they have the
                                resources and technological fluency to defeat robust cyber defenses. And
                                remember, a government will have different motivations than a criminal.
                                Here’s something you may not have realized: financial gain isn’t always the
                                objective of these nation-state attacks. Prior to 2013, nation-state attacks
                                against banks primarily caused denials of service. The governments that
                                executed these operations—primarily Iran and North Korea—did so to
                                make a statement, retaliate, or weaken the economic strength of the nation
                                in which the bank operates. In 2013, after years of denial-of-service (DoS)
                                attacks, nations began financial theft operations, as restrictions against
                                these poorer nations were inhibiting their economies, motivating them
                                to steal.
                                     While it is now common to read about nation-state cyberattacks result-
                                ing in substantial economic losses, these attacks are still a relatively new
                                threat. Understanding the evolution of these attacks helps explain how
                                these nation-states became the financial attackers that they are today.
                                In this chapter, we will discuss attacks against the financial industry and
                                attackers’ motivations and methodologies.


                    Distributed DoS Attacks Against Financial Institutions
                                On July 4, 2009, banking websites in the United States and South Korea
                                became suddenly unresponsive; a massive cyberattack had infected a total
                                of 50,000 computers, most located in South Korea, according to reports.
                                The attack had used malware later named Dozer, which spread via phishing
                                emails.
                                    Perhaps surprisingly, the attacks did not attempt to steal money from
                                the institutions. Instead, they crippled banks’ functional capabilities by
                                leaving them unable to provide services. Denying financial resources and
                                services to consumers, it turned out, is an effective form of cyberattack: lack
                                of access can often be as effective as outright theft. After all, banks usually
                                protect and insure customer funds, but none of that matters during a bank
                                outage. In these instances, consumers cannot use debit cards, withdraw
                                money from automatic teller machines (ATMs), or even go to a branch to
                                make a withdrawal. If you’ve ever gone to an ATM to withdraw funds and
                                found that it was out of order, or attempted to use your debit card and had
                                the transaction denied, imagine if that same problem prevented you from
                                accessing your money for a week. It would likely make you think twice about
                                how you handle your banking needs.


           36       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 36                                                                                                 11/4/21 2:58 PM
                         Hackers understood this, and the 2009 incidents were the first in a series
                    of attacks designed to place doubt in the minds of consumers.1 If enough
                    people lost trust in banks and the financial systems behind them, the nation’s
                    economy could become affected. In the worst-case scenario, if consumers did
                    not trust banks, they might begin to withdraw funds while ceasing to deposit
                    money, causing a domino effect and potentially weakening a nation’s econ-
                    omy. This is not as likely in countries with large, strong economies.

                    The Dozer Attack
                    The Dozer malware incident represents the first publicly known attack in
                    which a nation-state targeted financial institutions, and it is widely attrib-
                    uted to North Korea. The phishing emails used in the attack contained
                    an attachment that dropped several malware components onto victims’
                    systems. From there, the attackers could leverage these compromised
                    resources directly. These components included the following2:

                    •   W32.Dozer: The mechanism that dropped the other malicious
                        components.
                    •   Trojan.Dozer: A component that provided the DDoS and backdoor, or
                        remote access, functionality.
                    •   W32.Mydoom.A@mm: A worm used for spreading the malware to addi-
                        tional victims.
                    •   W32.Mytob!gen: A component that infected victims’ systems, accessed
                        their email contacts, and sent Trojan.Dozer to every entry in their
                        address books. As this process continued, the rate of infection grew
                        rapidly. This increased the number of resources involved in the DDoS
                        component of the attack.

                         The attack involved other resources, too, such as botnets that attackers
                    purchased or obtained through unreported means. Using other people’s
                    tools limited the chance of outsiders identifying their custom malware in
                    the wild prior to the attack. The process of infecting thousands of systems
                    would have provided defenders with an opportunity to discover and attri-
                    bute the activity before the denial-of-service attack, lowering the chances
                    of success. On the other hand, the attacker could purchase a botnet from
                    cybercriminals with almost no risk of exposure.
                         The attack itself was clever primarily because it propagated itself using
                    a worm that spread to other systems automatically. Once far more preva-
                    lent, this form of malware often appeared in the lower-level attacks of the
                    mid-to-late 1990s and early 2000s. Even a simple worm could quickly share
                    malware and other malicious components, leading to maximum infection
                    with minimal overhead. Furthermore, attackers did not need to interact
                    with any part of the systems manually.
                         Attackers conducted three waves of DDoS attacks between July 4 and
                    July 9, each targeting a different set of websites, including the following
                    finance-related domains: banking.nonghyup.com, ezbank.shinhan.com, ebank
                    .keb.co.kr, www.nyse.com, www.nasdaq.com, finance.yahoo.com, www.usbank.com,

                                                                         State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   37



502147c02.indd 37                                                                                             11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                and www.ustreas.gov. While the attackers did not target financial institu-
                                tions alone, this was one of the first instances in which a nation-state used
                                cyber weapons to cause harm to the financial sector.
                                    Unlike attacks originating from non-nation-state cybercriminals, the
                                malware had unique characteristics: although it became active on July 4,
                                the attackers configured it to terminate on July 10, ceasing the DDoS and
                                launching the attack’s second component.
                                    Unfortunately for the victims, once July 10 arrived, the malware’s final
                                destructive act began. It began wiping data with specific file extensions
                                from the systems. Then it erased their master boot records (MBRs), render-
                                ing the systems useless. Once done, the malware presented the message
                                “Memory of the Independence Day”—a thank-you note of sorts from the
                                attackers. This anti-U.S. message proved to be yet another clue that the attack
                                did not originate from a cybercriminal.
                                    At the time of the attacks, public speculation placed North Korea as the
                                prime culprit. The attacks came as North Korea was conducting ballistic
                                missile tests, despite previous sanctions against such tests. In 2014, the U.S.
                                government confirmed the attribution.3

                                Ten Days of Rain
                                The next major DDoS attack targeting financial institutions occurred two
                                years later. In its tactics and malware, the attack had many similarities to
                                the 2009 attacks. More significantly, however, the 2011 attack replicated the
                                three-phased operation of the Dozer incident. Later, other nation-states
                                would adopt this attack model to use in their operations. Table 2-1 walks
                                through this attack model.

                                Table 2-1: Nation-State Three-Phase Denial-of-Service Attack Model
                                Phase name                 Attack details
                                Phase 1, “Bot infection”   In the first phase, the attackers infected hosts with malware,
                                                           which built and powered the bot necessary for the DDoS
                                                           phase of the attack.
                                Phase 2, “DDoS attacks” The second phase used the system resources to target spe-
                                                        cific sites affiliated with organizations with a DDoS attack.
                                Phase 3, “Sabotage and The third phase caused chaos, destroying systems and data,
                                destruction”           rendering them useless. The attackers also used this phase
                                                       as an opportunity to display images and messages to the
                                                       victim.


                                     Once again, the public blamed North Korea at the time of the incident.
                                In the years since, the U.S. government has discovered binary similarities
                                in the malware used in the attack and other malware attributed to North
                                Korea, bolstering this claim.
                                     One of the differences between the 2009 and 2011 attacks is how the
                                later malware, Trojan.Koredos, handled its configuration and DDoS target



           38       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 38                                                                                                           11/4/21 2:58 PM
                    data. The earlier Dozer malware communicated with a command-and-
                    control infrastructure to obtain instructions and configuration parameters,
                    such as the list of targets. This communication had to traverse networks
                    between the victim and the adversary’s infrastructure. By contrast, the
                    Trojan.Koredos malware used in 2011 already contained the target list
                    and attack parameters, making this external communication unnecessary.
                    Automated defenses can identify when malicious activity is taking place on
                    their network by identifying the network communications that originate
                    from the malware itself. As the malware didn’t require external communica-
                    tion, defenders had one less opportunity to identify and mitigate the attack.
                         Also, predetermined start and stop times were built into the malware
                    itself. The attackers wanted the DDoS operation to last for 10 days. For this
                    reason, the March 2011 attacks were dubbed the Ten Days of Rain.
                         During the attack, media outlets reported that some South Korean
                    banks’ servers crashed, and websites became unresponsive. According to
                    the Washington Post, “30 million customers of the Nonghyup agricultural
                    bank were unable to use ATMs or online services for several days.” They
                    stated that key data was destroyed.4

                    IRGC Targets U.S. Banks (2011–2013)
                    In late 2011, banks began to see spikes in the traffic affecting the perfor-
                    mance of their systems and services, suggesting they had become the target
                    of attackers. This initial activity likely constituted the attackers’ dry run: a
                    fire drill of sorts, used to test their ability to disrupt regular operations and
                    discover if they could maintain an attack from one week to the next. But by
                    September 2012, the activity had dramatically morphed from an engage-
                    ment targeting a small subset of institutions to a major attack against many
                    banks throughout the United States. The attackers had designed and orga-
                    nized their efforts to take down bank websites and resources concurrently.5
                         Once again, the attackers targeted the banks not for financial gain but
                    to demonstrate their power. The DDoS campaign would continue through
                    2013, affecting approximately 50 U.S. financial institutions in one of the
                    most comprehensive and lengthy DDoS campaigns known to date. Victims
                    included well-known banks, such as JPMorgan Chase, Wells Fargo, and
                    Bank of America.6
                         A Middle Eastern hacktivist group, the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Cyber
                    Fighters, soon took credit for the attacks. The group posted messages on
                    Pastebin, like the one in Figure 2-1, that called for others to support its
                    cause against the United States.7




                    Figure 2-1: Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Cyber Fighters’ message posted to Pastebin




                                                                             State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   39



502147c02.indd 39                                                                                                 11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                     Yet according to media reports at the time, sources involved with U.S.
                                intelligence attributed the attacks to the Iranian government.8 This attribu-
                                tion relied on circumstantial evidence, and the reports did not name their
                                sources, but the argument still held weight; DDoS attacks are common and
                                do not require a significant degree of technical skill, which is why they are
                                popular with hacktivist groups. However, no attacker had yet succeeded in
                                sustaining such a lengthy, ongoing attack of this size against nearly 50 institu-
                                tions. Post-compromise reports described how banks were hit with as much
                                as 140 Gbps of data per second, making it the most powerful DDoS attack on
                                record at the time. Moreover, the incident, which stretched over a year, proved
                                longer lasting than any previously reported attack. That a hacktivist group
                                would have been able to conduct and maintain a DDoS campaign of this
                                scope is highly unlikely. Its magnitude suggests a state like Iran was behind it.
                                     If this was not the work of a hacktivist group but the nation-state of
                                Iran, then the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Cyber Fighters attribution functioned
                                as a coordinated disinformation campaign. Although not the first time a
                                nation used disinformation to provide plausible deniability, it is one of the
                                most public instances coming from Iran.
                                     In March 2016, the U.S. government issued a federal indictment against
                                two organizations, ITSEC Team and Mersad Co. The indictment described
                                these as “private computer security companies based in the Islamic Republic
                                of Iran” that performed “work on the behalf of the Iranian Government,
                                including the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC).” The affidavit
                                charges the organizations—and specifically seven Iranian citizens—with
                                infecting computers, building a botnet, and conducting a DDoS campaign
                                against financial institutions from 2011 through 2013. Figure 2-2 is the image
                                released by the FBI of the individuals charged in the attacks.9




                                Figure 2-2: Individuals wanted by the FBI for taking part
                                in Iran-based DDoS attacks against financial institutions


           40       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 40                                                                                                   11/4/21 2:58 PM
                         These, allegedly, are the faces of the DDoS attack. Still, many others,
                    including higher-ranking individuals associated with the IRGC, likely took part
                    in the attacks or at least had relevant knowledge of it. The U.S. government
                    probably released the indictment publicly to send a message to the Iranian
                    government, as it is unlikely that the United States will ever apprehend these
                    men. The United States has no jurisdiction in Iran, nor will the Iranian gov-
                    ernment cooperate in convicting operators it hired to support its operations.
                         Public and media speculation has proposed that the attacks came in
                    response to sanctions against Iran’s nuclear program, as well as retaliation
                    for the Stuxnet attacks against Iran’s nuclear facilities in 2010.

                    DarkSeoul
                    On March 19, 2013, the cybersecurity firm Trend Micro detected a wave of
                    spear-phishing emails targeting South Korean financial institutions.10 The
                    following day, banks and media organizations began reporting widespread
                    outages; the malware had destroyed their infrastructure, rendering their
                    systems and resources useless. Trend Micro released a report stating that
                    the “websites of several banks may have been compromised and exploits
                    [were] used to plant backdoors on the systems of [website] visitors.” Avast,
                    an antivirus vendor, published its own blog documenting what it believed
                    was a strategic web compromise geared at South Korean banks.11
                         At the time, neither vendor had all of the details of the attack correct,
                    as both had come across something much bigger than they originally real-
                    ized. Cybersecurity officials blamed China at first: the attack relied on
                    adversary infrastructure located in China, and Chinese names were found
                    in the malware. Future evidence would later prove these attributions incor-
                    rect, serving as an excellent example as to why it is smart to use more reli-
                    able supporting evidence before making public attribution assessments.
                         In addition to misattribution muddying the waters, the attackers took
                    steps to misdirect blame through diversion and misinformation. They cre-
                    ated two social-media-based hacktivist groups, the NewRomanic Cyber
                    Army Team and Whois Team. These groups claimed responsibility for the
                    attacks by posting messages, such as the one in Figure 2-3, on defaced web-
                    sites and victim computers.12




                    Figure 2-3: “Whois Team” message
                    taking credit for 2013 DDoS attacks

                                                                        State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   41



502147c02.indd 41                                                                                            11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                      Nobody had heard of either group prior to the 2013 attacks, leading
                                many to believe, correctly, that someone had simply invented the personas;
                                the groups produced no posts or affiliated social media accounts before
                                or after March 2013. In fact, South Korean government officials have since
                                claimed the attack originated from North Korea. Unique code found only in
                                North Korean malware supported their attribution.13
                                      Like previous North Korean DDoS attacks, attackers used spear-phishing
                                emails, as well as compromised websites, to infect victims’ systems with first-
                                stage malware. This attack also used a destructive wiper malware, although
                                this time, attackers did not begin by leveraging a botnet to take down web-
                                sites and servers. Instead, the attackers directly infected the intended target
                                with the wiper, which itself functioned as a denial of service. By destroying
                                systems and data in the targeted organizations, such as South Korean finan-
                                cial institutions, the attack made critical services unavailable and therefore
                                had the same effect as the previous DDoS campaigns.
                                      In addition to the infection vectors mentioned, attackers used a third,
                                more creative, and especially effective vector: a software update mecha-
                                nism. This allowed them to bypass target defenses and stealthily plant
                                malware onto many systems within the targets’ infrastructure. The attack-
                                ers knew that South Korean financial organizations would likely use South
                                Korean security vendors to protect their assets. As it so happened, at least
                                one financial target in this attack used software from Ahnlabs, a South
                                Korean vendor, for both its antivirus and patch-management solutions.
                                Thus, before deploying the wiper malware on victims’ systems, the attackers
                                gained control of an account with administrative access to Ahnlabs’ patch
                                management software within the targets’ local environment.14
                                      Ahnlabs itself was never compromised in these attacks, as the first
                                reports indicated. Instead, attackers obtained the Ahnlabs credentials from
                                the victims’ local environment. Attackers can do a lot of damage when they
                                obtain administrative privileges in an environment with many unpatched
                                systems; the vendor’s patch management software provided updates to
                                almost every system within the client environment. The attackers used this
                                to bypass the targets’ firewalls and security defenses, delivering malware
                                instead of software fixes. By disguising it as a software update, attackers
                                silently distributed the wiper throughout the targets’ infrastructure, where
                                the infection spread to other targets through a variety of means.15
                                      At 2 pm local time, the wiper executed across seven victim organizations:
                                four financial institutions and three media companies. Attackers had designed
                                it to destroy the master boot record on the targeted systems, preventing the
                                systems from starting up. The 2009 and 2011 DDoS attacks attributed to
                                North Korea had also done this. In those attacks, however, the malware had
                                simply deleted the boot record, and while not easy, it’s possible to recover from
                                such a deletion. The wiper malware in the 2013 attacks took an additional step
                                of overwriting the record, and all data on the associated drive, with the strings
                                “PRINCIPES” or “HASTATI.” By overwriting the data instead of just erasing
                                it, the attackers made it much harder, if not impossible, to recover the lost con-
                                tents. Once the malware finished wiping and overwriting, the malware forced
                                the system to reboot, rendering it useless, since the malware had removed

           42       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 42                                                                                                    11/4/21 2:58 PM
                    all data that the system needed in order to boot. The attack affected at least
                    48,700 systems upon reaching the predetermined end time.16
                         Once again, bank customers found themselves unable to withdraw or
                    deposit funds through ATMs. Additionally, employees were unable to use
                    bank terminals to assist customers, leaving many customers with no access
                    to their accounts. Bank websites experienced intermittent outages, or were
                    slow to respond, and the affected broadcast companies reported taking
                    entire networks offline.
                         Two other technical details make this attack unique. The first is that
                    the attackers tailored the malware to infect various operating systems.
                    Corporate environments most commonly use Microsoft Windows as their
                    operating system of choice; Unix-based systems, on the other hand, are
                    prominent in backend banking platforms. The wiper was capable of eras-
                    ing Windows systems as well as Unix-based ones, such as AIX, HP Unix,
                    Linux, and Solaris, which often authorize and coordinate information
                    exchanges within banking transactions.
                         The second unique aspect of these attacks is that the attackers tailored
                    the malware to look for and disable specific antivirus programs running
                    within the target victims’ environment. If the victims had installed either
                    Hauri or Ahnlabs antivirus software on their systems, the wiper component
                    activated itself only after disabling the security software, ensuring its success-
                    ful execution.
                         The sophistication of this attack is worth emphasizing. The malware
                    included several nation-state attribution hints in its design to throw off
                    security researchers. It targeted multiple operating systems and relied on
                    various delivery vectors, antivirus evasion, and mitigations, showing the
                    attackers put time, effort, and resources into the attacks prior to the cam-
                    paign execution. Finally, using fake personas to take credit for the attack is
                    a tactic that cybercriminals or hacktivists rarely use. All of these elements of
                    the campaign are hallmarks of a nation-state attack.

                    Russian Attacks Against Ukraine
                    Although we won’t discuss the topic in detail in this chapter, Russia has con-
                    ducted similar attacks to those discussed thus far, resulting in a DoS of banks
                    in Ukraine.17 For example, in 2014, Cyber Berkut, a nation-state group with
                    strong ties to Russian intelligence, forced PrivatBank—the largest Ukrainian
                    commercial bank—to shut down operations.18 The attackers compromised
                    the bank and then released both sensitive customer and bank operational
                    data to several public websites, including Twitter and V.K., a Russian social
                    media platform. The data included customer names, addresses, and account
                    balances, as well as engineering and infrastructure information specific to
                    the bank’s internal network. The final nail in the coffin for the bank came
                    when the attackers instructed bank customers to remove their money from
                    the bank or permanently lose access to their funds. The bank never truly
                    recovered from the attack or the resulting loss of customers, who likely lost
                    faith in the institution’s ability to protect their money.
                         Within two years, the disaster forced the Ukraine government to take over
                    the bank’s operations, preventing bankruptcy and removing its commercial

                                                                         State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   43



502147c02.indd 43                                                                                             11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                interests, to make it a 100 percent state-owned institution.19 The cyberattack
                                against the bank may not have been the only cause, but it contributed to a
                                ripple effect across the nation’s economy, forcing the bank’s nationalization.


                    Billion-Dollar Robberies
                                The world didn’t begin to see large-scale financial thefts until 2013, when
                                cyberattackers, likely from North Korea, stole funds from Sonali Bank in
                                Bangladesh. The first confirmed North Korean financial theft would take
                                place in 2015, though many similarities exist among the tactics and behav-
                                iors present in the 2013 and 2015 attacks.
                                     These thefts likely came as a consequence of economic sanctions
                                imposed on North Korea. The sanctions, which aimed to prevent the
                                growth of the state’s military and nuclear capabilities, kept North Korea
                                from trading with other countries, including importing critical oil and gas,
                                therefore forcing North Korea to rely on homegrown assets and resources.20
                                To remain relevant on the world stage—and not starve—North Korea has
                                had to look for more creative ways to grow its economy.
                                     Unfortunately for the financial industry, one of North Korea’s primary
                                responses to the sanctions has been cyberattacks. Its cyber campaigns have
                                successfully stolen hundreds of millions of dollars.

                                SWIFT Attacks
                                Many of these financial thefts began with the compromise of the Society for
                                Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) messaging
                                system. SWIFT is software that financial organizations use to communicate
                                transaction information with each other.21 North Korea obtained access to
                                the organizations’ internal SWIFT systems, as in the following attacks, which
                                cybersecurity officials have either attributed to North Korea or matched with
                                tactics present in known North Korean attacks (see Table 2-2):

                                Table 2-2: Timeline of Financial Institutions Targeted
                                by North Korea
                                 Year    Country        Institution
                                 2013    Bangladesh     Sonali Bank
                                 2015    Ecuador        Banco del Austro
                                 2015    Vietnam        Tien Phong Bank
                                 2016    Bangladesh     Bank of Bangladesh
                                 2017    Nepal          NIC Asia Bank
                                 2017    Taiwan         Far Eastern International Bank
                                 2018    Mexico         Central Bank and Banorte
                                 2018    India          City Union Bank
                                 2018    Chile          Banco de Chile



           44       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 44                                                                                                11/4/21 2:58 PM
                         In some instances, the attackers used spear-phishing emails to distrib-
                    ute malware; in others, they used watering holes. But the attackers never
                    compromised the SWIFT organization itself. Instead, they exploited vulner-
                    abilities in the client-side systems at banks, which enabled attackers to alter
                    systems utilizing SWIFT messaging transactions. This is important to men-
                    tion, as a large number of financial organizations continue to rely on the
                    integrity of SWIFT. Today, SWIFT itself remains trustworthy.

                    The North Korea Financial Theft Model
                    On June 8, 2018, the U.S. Department of Justice issued a criminal com-
                    plaint against a North Korean citizen named Park Jin Hyok. The complaint
                    documented several computer-related crimes, including hacking, that Park
                    conducted along with unnamed individuals. The complaint provides an
                    inside look at the hacking operations of North Korea, one of the most noto-
                    rious nation-state attackers to date. It also offers extremely useful details for
                    a defensive perspective. This section draws on this information.
                         The staged attack model listed here originates from details within
                    the Department of Justice’s criminal complaint, in conjunction with
                    research and publicly available analyses from security vendors.22 It
                    involves the following phases: reconnaissance, initial compromise, obser-
                    vation and learning, enumeration and privilege escalation, preparation
                    of the staged environment (account and resource creation), execution of
                    fraudulent transactions, and deletion of evidence.
                         While some of the malware and tactic details varied from one attack to
                    another, North Korea continued to use the same phased attack described
                    earlier. It’s fair to conclude that North Korea will use the same approach for
                    as long as it succeeds.

                    Reconnaissance
                    The attackers spent considerable time performing reconnaissance. For
                    example, Park conducted online reconnaissance “a year before the cyber-
                    heist at Bangladesh Bank.”23 During this stage, the attackers would gather
                    information about the bank’s public-facing infrastructure, as well as
                    associated email addresses. Park researched the target bank’s website and
                    employees, including their social media accounts. In some instances, the
                    attackers used services that specialized in “locating email accounts associ-
                    ated with specific domains and companies.” 24
                         Attackers collected email addresses to create target lists for use in the
                    next phase of the attack. In some instances, the attackers created spoofed
                    accounts that mimicked someone known to the target. In others, the attacker
                    created email addresses to register social media accounts. Attackers lever-
                    aged these social media accounts in later stages of the attack. Furthermore,
                    attackers also mapped out the target’s public infrastructure, likely in an
                    attempt to identify any vulnerabilities that they could exploit to gain access
                    to the victim’s environment in later stages as well. Park also researched
                    specific vulnerabilities to identify how to exploit them. Presumably, these


                                                                         State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   45



502147c02.indd 45                                                                                             11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                were vulnerabilities he identified when conducting reconnaissance into the
                                Bangladesh Bank’s infrastructure.
                                    In addition to these factors, attackers created and staged accounts and
                                online personas during the reconnaissance phase of the attack. They cre-
                                ated email accounts from free, publicly available webmail platforms such
                                as Gmail. Later in the process of the attack, these accounts interacted with
                                bank employees and sent spear-phishing emails.

                                Initial Compromise
                                Multiple North Korean financial theft campaigns used social engineering
                                in the form of spear-phishing emails to compromise and gain access to the
                                target’s environment. Attackers tailored these spear-phishing emails to
                                target the individuals and accounts that they had identified during recon-
                                naissance. According to U.S. federal investigators, North Korean hackers
                                crafted emails in several high-profile bank attacks that were “highly targeted,
                                (and) reflect the known affiliations or interests of the intended victims, and
                                are crafted—with the use of appropriate formatting, imagery, and nomen-
                                clature—to mimic legitimate emails that the recipient might expect to
                                receive.”25 In other words, the attackers spent time and resources to make
                                the email specific, relevant, and appear legitimate to the targets.
                                     Once compromised, attackers used the email accounts to send spear-
                                phishing emails to other bank officials from legitimate accounts. This
                                aspect of familiarity added legitimacy to the emails. The attackers often
                                were not interested in compromising additional recipients; however, they
                                included them, so the actual target saw familiar email addresses in the “To”
                                or “CC” line of the email. This tactic demonstrates the level of detail and
                                planning the attackers put into their spear-phishing emails.
                                     Companies often use public-facing email addresses that are not
                                attached to a specific individual. Instead, a group or an administrator at the
                                organization monitors these public-facing email addresses. A typical example
                                of this is when companies use a single email address to receive résumés and
                                other types of correspondence. At Bangladesh Bank, the attackers recognized
                                such an email address as an opportunity to submit a résumé weaponized with
                                malware. Examples within the criminal complaint included links in the body
                                of the email requesting that targets click to view a résumé. When the targets
                                clicked the link, malware compromised their systems, providing attackers
                                with access to both the system and the environment.
                                     Other North Korean compromise attempts included the use of emails
                                mimicking alerts or notifications from social media and service providers
                                such as Google and Facebook. For example, attackers utilized standard
                                emails alerting users when someone accessed their account from a new
                                location. The fraudulent emails mirrored legitimate ones by including the
                                same text and images. The primary differences between the two were the
                                sender address—which attackers also often spoofed—and the URLs within
                                the email. Attackers made sure to obfuscate the links in order to appear
                                legitimate, but these links took the victims to attacker-controlled infrastruc-
                                ture to infect them with malware.


           46       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 46                                                                                              11/4/21 2:58 PM
                        Financial institutions suffered from attacks other than spear-phishing
                    campaigns, however. In 2016 and 2017, legitimate financial-themed websites
                    that other banking companies and individuals often visited succumbed to
                    infection. These websites then infected site visitors with custom malware.
                    For example, attackers compromised the website of the Polish Financial
                    Supervision Authority, and the website later infected financial organiza-
                    tions in Poland.26 The attackers knew that many other banks in this region
                    would often visit the website. Similar attacks occurred around the same
                    time, affecting the site of a Mexican financial regulator and a bank in
                    South America. Each attack compromised systems and resulted in the
                    website serving malware to website visitors. Later, analysis of the malware
                    distributed by the compromised sites showed an overlap in code only previ-
                    ously seen in North Korean malware.

                    Observation and Learning
                    In all of the North Korean–attributed financial attacks, the attackers spent
                    time learning the local environment. Based on the behaviors seen across
                    multiple intrusions, North Korea is a patient attacker that spends consider-
                    able amounts of time within the targets’ environment before executing the
                    financial theft phase of the attack. In some cases, the attackers spent sev-
                    eral months observing and learning the systems and how they connect and
                    interact with other banking resources.
                         For example, a unique attribute of these attacks is the amount of time
                    the North Korean attackers spent learning the banks’ policies and pro-
                    cedures. Here, the objective for the attackers was to better understand
                    how employees handle and conduct financial transactions. This is notable
                    because, except for nation-state espionage campaigns that were not a major
                    concern to financial institutions at the time, it was generally unheard of for
                    an attacker to spend time learning the targets’ employee policies and pro-
                    cedures. Doing so, however, is another example of the planning and patience
                    the attackers put into these operations. This also illustrates the differences
                    between a typical financial attacker and a nation-state attacker.
                         North Korea’s diligence in learning the banks’ noncyber policies paid
                    off. Two of the targeted banks, Tien Phong Bank (Vietnam) and Bank of
                    Bangladesh, archived SWIFT transactions differently than most financial
                    institutions. Bangladesh Bank printed paper copies of SWIFT messages.
                    Hard copies of the transactions provided a physical record archived at
                    the bank. Tien Phong Bank, however, stored electronic PDF versions of
                    the messages on a third-party server. It used FoxIt Reader, an application
                    for managing digital documents such as PDFs, to convert SWIFT message
                    details into PDF records. The attackers identified this process and devel-
                    oped malware that would infect the bank’s systems when bank employees
                    attempted to access the PDF software by replacing that application with a
                    weaponized version of the software.
                         If the attackers had tried to implement this at Bangladesh Bank, it
                    would not have worked. This is because the bank used printed copies to
                    archive transaction messages. Alternatively, at the Vietnamese bank, if the


                                                                       State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   47



502147c02.indd 47                                                                                           11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                attackers had attempted to print hard copies instead of saving the messages
                                as PDFs, it would likely draw attention to their activities. Taking the time
                                to learn each bank’s unique business processes allowed the attackers to
                                identify creative ways to further infect and quietly execute fraudulent trans-
                                actions. More importantly, the attackers used the information to blend in
                                with legitimate bank activity.

                                Enumeration and Privilege Escalation
                                The attackers also used various hack tools (often publicly available) to
                                enumerate the victims’ environments. The goal of enumeration was to
                                identify computers the bank used to send and receive messages via the
                                SWIFT communication system.27 As part of their security practices, the
                                targeted institutions implemented a segregation of duties policy within
                                their environments. This is a practice that prevents any one person from
                                having complete access to critical business systems and functions within
                                the environment. Unfortunately, this did not prevent the attackers from
                                gaining the necessary access to attempt fraudulent financial transactions.
                                It did, however, increase the difficulty of the attack. The attackers needed
                                access to multiple protected accounts to get into various systems and segre-
                                gated networks before infiltrating the accounts and systems associated with
                                SWIFT transactions.
                                     Many of these administrative accounts fell into attackers’ control via
                                using credential-collecting hack tools, such as keyloggers, or through spear-
                                phishing emails sent from legitimate internal bank accounts. One such
                                keylogger present in the Bangladesh Bank heist hid within the C:\Windows\
                                Web\Wallpaper\Windows\ directory on a compromised host, indicating the
                                malware may have been delivered through an attachment mimicking desk-
                                top wallpaper.28

                                Preparing the Stage
                                To continue operations and stage the target environment, the attackers
                                needed to maintain an undetected presence. The malware’s communi-
                                cation traffic could have caught the attention of defenders as it actively
                                communicated with both internal victim infrastructure and adversary
                                command-and-control servers.
                                     In an effort to hide their activity, attackers used what has been described
                                as a “custom binary protocol designed to look like ‘TLS’ traffic” to encrypt
                                the malware’s communications.29 TLS, short for Transport Layer Security,
                                is an encryption-layer protocol that protects network communication traf-
                                fic such that it cannot appear as clear text while in transit. The attackers
                                used a version of the TLS protocol that had a fake TLS header. The TLS
                                header leveraged a unique cipher suite with a hardcoded array, altering
                                network traffic at the encryption level, making it difficult to detect. Then
                                the attacker created a second version, which also used a fake header; how-
                                ever, instead of a hardcoded array, the cipher suite used a random cipher.
                                These were then appended to the command-and-control communication
                                traffic generated by the malware. A cipher suite is comprised of algorithms

           48       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 48                                                                                                  11/4/21 2:58 PM
                    used for cryptographic operations, such as encryption and decryption, and
                    allows for key exchange and other authentication procedures that banks
                    commonly use today to secure traffic between communicating hosts.
                         The attackers built the encryption protocol into a custom-developed
                    backdoor known as NESTEGG. Without the proper encryption key or an
                    understanding of the custom protocol, nobody could decrypt traffic origi-
                    nating from the infected system. Since the communication traffic appeared
                    similar to legitimate TLS traffic, the attackers were able to communicate
                    with command-and-control infrastructure covertly.
                         The attackers added another level of complexity by having the NESTEGG
                    backdoor run in memory on the victim system. We call malicious code that
                    runs exclusively in memory on the victim’s system fileless malware. The ben-
                    efit of this design is the malware can go undetected, since it’s not written to,
                    or present on, a physical drive; it executes and runs commands directly in
                    memory. Most security products monitor and detect files as they write to the
                    hard disk of the protected system.
                         The drawback of fileless malware is its lack of persistence. Since the
                    disk is not written to, fileless malware can be deleted if the infected system
                    reboots or restarts. The NESTEGG malware, however, addresses this short-
                    coming by monitoring the victim system to detect shutdown and reboot
                    functions. When it identifies either of these events, the malware installs a
                    copy of itself onto the victim’s hard drive to reinstate itself once the operat-
                    ing system restores. After rebooting and reinstalling, the malware deletes
                    the copy written to the hard disk and once again exists only in memory on
                    the victim system.
                         NESTEGG had various other notable functions, such as “acting as a
                    proxy to send commands to other infected systems, and [accept] commands
                    to upload and download files, list and delete files, start, and terminate
                    processes.”30 These capabilities allowed the attackers to stage, prepare,
                    and further compromise the banks’ systems and networks. Specifically, the
                    attackers placed malware on various systems involved with processing the
                    banks’ financial transactions.

                    Execution of Fraudulent Transactions
                    Up to this point, the attackers had gained access; observed bank systems,
                    applications, and processes; and staged malware throughout the bank’s net-
                    work. Using the malware and information gained, the attackers were able to
                    acquire various types of administrative accounts. Typically, no single entity
                    would (or should) have complete access to the systems and components
                    used to conduct a bank’s financial transactions. However, these attackers
                    used vast resources generally not available to typical criminals to obtain all
                    the credentials necessary to authorize financial transactions.
                         Next, the attackers used the accounts to log into the SWIFT Alliance
                    application, a message interface application, to conduct financial transac-
                    tions. The SWIFT systems are usually separate from other bank networks,
                    and network segregation, enforced with routers and firewalls, protects the
                    systems. In the Bangladesh Bank heist, however, the bank’s infrastructure


                                                                        State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   49



502147c02.indd 49                                                                                            11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                did not meet the security standards that should have been in place. In a
                                report titled “North Korean Cyber Capabilities,” the U.S. Congressional
                                Research Service noted the following31:
                                         Bangladesh’s network may have been particularly vulnerable, as it
                                         reportedly lacked a firewall to protect against outside intrusion.

                                     Of note, in some of the North Korean financial attacks, the attackers
                                obtained access to legitimate accounts, while in others, they created new
                                ones. This included the operator accounts necessary to access the local
                                SWIFT Alliance application. The Alliance application is a “messaging inter-
                                face (that) allows banks and market infrastructures to connect to SWIFT”
                                and allows various financial institutions to create and confirm financial
                                transactions. 32 If the targeted institution had proper security controls
                                in place, the creation of the operator accounts should have appeared to
                                the institution as an uncommon or unusual event. In addition to this, the
                                attackers unsuccessfully attempted to log into the Alliance application.
                                Unfortunately, neither the creation of the operator accounts nor the failed
                                login attempts alerted anyone, and the attackers gained complete access to
                                the bank’s local SWIFT systems.
                                     As previously mentioned, the attackers likely selected banks in coun-
                                tries or regions they believed to have weaker or less developed technology
                                security standards. Between using printed physical copies of SWIFT trans-
                                actions and not securing SWIFT systems, it is fair to say Bangladesh Bank
                                was an easier target than many other financial institutions.
                                     At this point, the attackers began to execute financial transactions. The
                                transactions appeared legitimate, given that an account with valid access to
                                the SWIFT system created and authorized them. From an outside perspec-
                                tive, as other banks involved in the transaction would view it, these were
                                legitimate transactions made with the proper authorization and access.
                                Before 2013, this type of attack had either not taken place or not been
                                publicly acknowledged, so there was no reason to doubt the legitimacy of
                                the transactions. In February 2016, the attacker-created SWIFT operator
                                accounts attempted at least 35 transactions. In total, North Korea tried to
                                steal nearly 1 billion dollars from the Bangladesh Bank.

                                Timing the Transaction Attempts
                                According to a 2019 public report that SWIFT published, the attackers
                                documented the time of the fraudulent transfers at the Bangladesh Bank.33
                                A pattern appeared: the transactions primarily occurred after working
                                hours, between 11 pm and midnight in the local time. The report also
                                documented the time of the attackers’ financial transactions at other banks
                                believed to have been targeted by the same North Korean attackers. Almost
                                every attack occurred between 9 pm and 4 am local time, when the banks
                                were closed.
                                    The second pattern present in several of the bank attacks deals with the
                                dates of the attacks. In several incidents, the attackers attempted fraudu-
                                lent transactions on holidays, when banks were closed. By conducting the


           50       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 50                                                                                                11/4/21 2:58 PM
                    transactions later in the evening to early morning and on holidays when
                    bank employees are less likely to be present, the attackers had an increased
                    chance of success.

                    Deleting Evidence and Covering Tracks
                    Methods and procedures varied for handling records associated with
                    SWIFT transactions at targeted banks. From an attacker’s perspective, if a
                    bank employee or the bank’s systems identified the transactions, this could
                    give away their operation. To address this, the attackers designed features
                    in their malware to delete files and other evidence left during the compro-
                    mise. For example, a forensic investigation of compromised bank systems
                    identified signs that the attackers had attempted to remove entries from
                    system logs. Another common tactic seen across all the financial attacks
                    was to delete malware from the infected systems once it had completed
                    its given task. Specifically, multiple North Korean malware variants such
                    as Contopee, NESTEGG, and SierraCharlie included a “secure delete
                    function.” However, the way the malware achieved this differed from one
                    variant to another. Additionally, while not always successful, the attackers
                    attempted to remove evidence of login attempts to the SWIFT Alliance
                    application and its associated database(s).
                         It is highly likely the attacker behind the SWIFT banking attacks
                    is the adversary behind the 2014 Sony Pictures Entertainment attacks.
                    Components in the malware, such as the secure delete function and the
                    custom cipher protocol, may have been initially designed for the Sony
                    attack and then modified or updated for use in the bank attacks between
                    2015 and 2018.

                    Bank of Bangladesh Response
                    The Federal Reserve Bank of New York received the attacker-generated
                    transaction requests. These transactions processed money transfers to
                    accounts in the Philippines and Sri Lanka. Fortunately for the Bangladesh
                    Bank, the total amount of the funds stolen was far less than the 1 billion
                    dollars that attackers had requested. Ironically, these attackers, who spent
                    a year carefully planning every detail of the heist, made a mistake in the
                    most critical phase of their attack: they misspelled the name of a destina-
                    tion bank in one of the transaction requests. The attackers spelled “NGO,
                    Shalika Foundation” as NGO Shalika “Fandation.” This simple spelling
                    error was enough for one of the banks routing the money to catch the
                    activity.34 When the routing bank identified the misspelling, it contacted
                    Bangladesh Bank, which immediately terminated the transaction.
                         The North Korean attackers would have stolen almost a billion dol-
                    lars, but according to media reports, the Federal Reserve had also con-
                    tacted the Bangladesh Bank because of the unusually large amount of
                    transfer requests and funds going to private organizations, such as the
                    NGO. The bank stopped the pending transactions. In total, the banks
                    managed to retain between $850 and $870 million by stopping these


                                                                      State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   51



502147c02.indd 51                                                                                          11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                transfers prior to reaching attacker-controlled accounts. Still, the attack-
                                ers successfully made away with approximately 101 million dollars from
                                Bangladesh Bank.

                                FASTCash: A Global ATM Robbery
                                On October 2, 2018, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) released
                                the US-CERT Technical Advisory, alerting financial organizations to a new
                                attack that used custom malware known as FASTCash. According to the
                                advisory, attackers had been working on this strike, which targeted financial
                                organizations located in Asia and Africa, since at least 2016. Additionally,
                                the U.S. government attributed the attack to Hidden Cobra (a name the
                                U.S. government gave to North Korean nation-state attackers).35 Following
                                the alert, several security vendors produced research on the operation.
                                One report found an overlap in the code FASTCash used and several other
                                North Korean variants of malware, further supporting the attribution.36

                                The Planning
                                North Korea is known for its creative and elaborate ways of stealing money
                                to support its operations. This creativity came into play here, too, when
                                a number of their bank heists only partially succeeded, as other routing
                                banks flagged the financial transactions and stopped them while in transit.
                                To get around this, the attackers developed a plan that would remove the
                                routing banks from the process, eliminating the chance for them to claim
                                that something was awry.
                                     Many of the tactics seen in the previous North Korean bank attacks
                                appeared in the FASTCash campaign. To gain access to the bank’s environ-
                                ment, the attackers sent spear-phishing emails to bank employees, which
                                infected their systems with custom malware. Once attackers obtained
                                access, they spent time observing the victims’ environment before attempt-
                                ing to steal funds. During this observation period, they also escalated their
                                level of access and identified vulnerable areas of the bank’s infrastructure.
                                     For the FASTCash attacks, the attackers identified banks in Asia and
                                Africa that used an outdated, unsupported version of AIX, a UNIX-based
                                operating system that IBM created. Since FASTCash is not effective against
                                current versions of AIX, it is unlikely that North Korea developed the mal-
                                ware before the breach. Instead, they took advantage of the opportunity
                                once they discovered the vulnerability. Experts theorize that North Korea
                                targets smaller banks in countries with weaker economies, as these are
                                likely to have less operational funding and therefore are more likely to have
                                outdated software and security controls.

                                The Execution
                                By exploiting the backend financial systems that banks used to process
                                and authorize cash disbursements, the North Korean attackers were able to
                                approve transactions that liquidated ATMs across 30 countries. The breadth
                                of FASTCash left experts with little doubt that this was not the work of a

           52       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 52                                                                                               11/4/21 2:58 PM
                    typical attacker but of a nation-state. While the malware’s functionality var-
                    ied, it shared similar design principles with the malware present in previous
                    bank attacks. For example, both the SWIFT attacks and the FASTCash cam-
                    paign used malware designed to interact with bank transaction authentica-
                    tion services; the earlier malware compromised the banks’ SWIFT system to
                    authorize the transfer of funds to attacker accounts, and FASTCash did the
                    same with transactions involving ATMs.
                         Here, broadly, is how FASTCash works: when bank customers withdraw
                    money from an ATM, they insert debit cards and enter their PINs. The
                    ATM uses the PINs to authenticate the cards’ owners. Once authentica-
                    tion is complete, the ATM reaches out to software called a payment switch
                    application, or switch, to process the customer requests. The switch checks if
                    there are sufficient funds in the account and then tells the ATM to either
                    approve the transaction and dispense cash or deny the request.
                         The FASTCash malware prevented the switch from transmitting and
                    processing fraudulent requests generated on the ATM. To do this, it moni-
                    tored ATM transaction messages for account numbers the attackers had
                    obtained in the preliminary phase of the attack. If the malware recognized
                    the account number, it responded to the ATM with a transaction approval
                    message, imitating the payment switch. The ATM believed the request to be
                    genuine and thus dispensed cash without ever sending the request to the
                    actual switch. In some reported instances, ATMs dispensed cash until they
                    ran out, because the approved request exceeded the funds on hand.
                         Later, investigators would learn that the attackers had such a strong
                    foothold in the targeted banks’ networks that they had been able to cre-
                    ate fraudulent bank accounts using legitimate systems. The attackers had
                    given these accounts balances of zero to avoid drawing attention; as the
                    malware acted as a middleman, preventing the actual switch from receiving
                    the request, the accounts didn’t need to be funded for the attack to work.
                    Eventually, investigators matched these accounts to those within the mal-
                    ware that liquidated ATMs.
                         At least two times, once in 2017 and again in 2018, North Korea used
                    FASTCash to execute coordinated simultaneous fraudulent transactions.
                    In 2017, North Korea stole funds from multiple banks at the same time in
                    more than 23 countries, in addition to the 30 countries targeted in 2018.
                    One of the banks, located in Africa, came under attack in 2018 and could not
                    return to normal operations for several months. Systems supporting ATM
                    and point-of-sale services damaged in the attack left the bank unable to
                    support their customers’ business operations.
                         In 2020, bank heist operations continued and evolved. North Korean
                    attackers had several years of successful attacks targeting bank payment
                    switches with FASTCash malware. However, the adversary faced bank tech-
                    nology limitations. Banks use different systems to perform transactions.
                    Not all banks used the vulnerable version of AIX, limiting the institutions
                    North Korea could target. To expand the target base of banks in which
                    they could attack, North Korea evolved and adapted, creating new versions
                    of FASTCash designed to exploit Microsoft Windows servers in addition to
                    AIX. As of September 2020, FASTCash operations attempted to steal more

                                                                       State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   53



502147c02.indd 53                                                                                           11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                than 2 billion dollars.37 Additionally, the attacker began using wiper mal-
                                ware, destroying bank systems as a distraction while attempting fraudulent
                                transactions. Between the expanded infection capabilities of the malware
                                and additional destructive tactics, FASTCash operations have become one
                                of the largest growing threats to financial institutions.


                    Odinaff: How Cybercriminals Learn from Nation-States
                                Earlier in this book, we pointed out differences between ordinary cyber-
                                criminals and nation-state attackers. Few cybercriminals are capable of the
                                persistence, patience, and planning used in the engagements covered in
                                this book so far. Unfortunately, there are always exceptions.
                                     The North Korean SWIFT attacks made global headlines in 2016, gar-
                                nering the attention of an organized cybercrime group named Odinaff.
                                That year, security researchers revealed what they had discovered of the
                                tactics, techniques, and procedures used in the SWIFT attacks to compro-
                                mise the banks. This information has helped better defend against these
                                incidents. But it also provided criminal attackers with a roadmap for future
                                bank compromises.
                                     Believed to originate from Eastern Europe, Odinaff successfully exploited
                                banks with its own malware. It relied on tactics first seen in North Korean
                                attacks, and current intelligence suggests that the group successfully stole mil-
                                lions of dollars from financial institutions.38
                                     As an initial attempt to gain access to the banks’ systems, the attackers
                                injected malware into a popular administrative tool called AmmyAdmin. They
                                hoped bank administrators would download it, effectively infecting them-
                                selves. To do this, the attackers compromised the legitimate AmmyAdmin
                                website—an attack that may sound elaborate, but in fact, criminals have fre-
                                quently compromised the same site to distribute commodity malware.

                      NOTE      The website used to host AmmyAdmin has been known to distribute remote access tro-
                                jans, exploit kits, and ransomware. Due to this risk, you should not visit the hosting
                                website or download this tool.

                                    While the AmmyAdmin tool might perhaps have functioned as an
                                effective infection vector, the attackers likely realized it gave them no
                                control over who downloaded the application. This risked infecting many
                                unintended victims. It also exposed them to unwanted public attention.
                                Probably for this reason, the attackers switched to the spear-phishing
                                emails, which allowed them to choose their targets.
                                    Odinaff’s spear-phishing emails were nowhere near as sophisticated as
                                North Korea’s. Although targeted, the phishing campaign used a generic
                                email template directing recipients to click a URL in the body of the email.
                                The URL would then download a malicious payload. The attachment, how-
                                ever, did not infect victims if they opened it. Instead, victims had to open a
                                compressed file that required the target to enter a password included in the
                                email text. If victims followed the attackers’ instructions, the archive would


           54       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 54                                                                                                        11/4/21 2:58 PM
                    decompress and present the target with a Microsoft Office document. Once
                    victims attempted to open the document, the attachment presented them
                    with the option to enable macros. If the target did not enable macros, the
                    infection would fail.
                         Only if victims followed all of these steps did the first-stage malware,
                    known as Trojan.Odinaff, compromise the system, providing the attackers
                    with initial access to the victims’ environment. That the attack required
                    so many active steps on the part of the victims points to its precarity; if
                    the targets had become suspicious of the emails, or perhaps the unusual
                    requirements necessary to open the attachment, the attack would have
                    failed. It may seem hard to fathom that anyone would fall for such a
                    scheme. Yet it happened more than once, in attacks across several banks.
                         The Odinaff malware provided basic backdoor functionality, issued
                    shell commands, and downloaded and executed additional malware. It used
                    something called a mutex, hardcoded into the binary itself. A mutex is an
                    object in the code used as an identifier. In this case, the identifier revealed
                    whether a system was already infected. If it was, the malware halted execu-
                    tion. This prevented multiple infections on the same host from taking
                    place, which would have tied up additional resources and potentially drawn
                    unwanted attention. The malware also used a hardcoded proxy to connect
                    to command-and-control servers, making it difficult for defenders to iden-
                    tify outgoing traffic.
                         Once in the victims’ environment, the attackers would review the
                    infected victims and identify systems of interest. They then used Odinaff’s
                    malware to download the stage-two malware, known as Backdoor.Batle, onto
                    the subset of high-value systems of interest. (Researchers coined the name
                    Backdoor.Batle after a string they found in the malware code containing the
                    term “BATLE_SOURCE.”)39 The Batle malware ran malicious payloads in
                    memory on the victims’ systems, and it created a reverse shell, launched
                    from a batch file, between it and the attackers’ infrastructure.
                         The Backdoor.Batle malware was designed and developed using com-
                    mon penetration-testing software, such as the red-team tools Metasploit
                    and CobaltStrike. The Metasploit framework identifies vulnerabilities and
                    executes exploitation code against them. CobaltStrike functions with
                    Metasploit to provide various post-exploitation and attack-management
                    capabilities. Penetration testers commonly use both for legitimate security
                    assessment exercises. Unfortunately, cyberattackers also use this tool to
                    find and exploit weaknesses in victims’ environments.
                         Odinaff’s attack shared another tactic with those of nation-states: the use
                    of tools already present in the victims’ environment. Using legitimate admin-
                    istrative tools and applications already present on the system, the attacker can
                    weaponize Microsoft Windows operating system binaries. This tactic, known
                    as Living Off the Land Binaries (LOLBins), allows attackers to hide malware
                    in legitimate system binaries often whitelisted by security tools. When a
                    binary is whitelisted, tools such as antivirus and endpoint detection software
                    will not detect the file as malicious. Whitelisting prevents security tools from
                    removing or quarantining the legitimate operating system resources that


                                                                        State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   55



502147c02.indd 55                                                                                            11/4/21 2:58 PM
                                could affect system functionality. Knowing this, attackers take advantage of
                                the legitimate resource to use in attacks and avoid detection.
                                     The Odinaff attackers used Windows administration software, such as
                                PSExec, Netscan, and PowerShell. When the attackers needed to fulfill a
                                capability unattainable by tools present in the victims’ environment, they
                                relied on publicly available hacktools instead of custom ones. A growing
                                trend in cyberattacks, this strategy makes discovery and attribution more
                                difficult. For example, both criminal and nation-state attackers have used
                                the hacking tool Mimikatz against banks, because it is freely available, effec-
                                tive, a favorite of legitimate red teams, and impossible to attribute.
                                     Using Batle, the attackers learned everything they could about the
                                victims’ environment. They spent time monitoring banks’ activities and
                                exploring the systems and infrastructure. Specifically, the Batle malware
                                included the ability to capture keystrokes and images of users’ screens in
                                5- to 30-second intervals. It then saved the output to a disk, where attack-
                                ers could retrieve and study the captures. This allowed criminal attackers
                                to learn the banks’ processes and technical procedures for the execution of
                                financial transactions. Another capability of the Batle malware—again,
                                modeled after the nation-states’—was a module that allowed attackers to
                                wipe the victims’ disk drive. Despite its inclusion, attackers did not use this
                                capability.
                                     The Odinaff attackers also manipulated the SWIFT messaging system
                                using tactics almost identical to the nation-states’. The malware looked for
                                any strings in the SWIFT messages that included specific details, such as
                                dates and international bank account numbers. When the date and account
                                number in a SWIFT message matched the details associated with a fraudu-
                                lent transaction, the malware suppressed the message, preventing the bank
                                from discovering the activity or at least delaying it until the funds were
                                already gone.
                                     While no cybersecurity officials have established solid attribution, sev-
                                eral clues point to attacker ties to Russia. Strings present in the malware,
                                as well as folder names, were comprised of Cyrillic characters; additionally,
                                some speculated the existence of a relationship between the Odinaff attack-
                                ers and the Carbanak malware attacks. Carbanak is the tool of choice of a
                                cybercriminal gang, also referred to as Carbanak, that has targeted large
                                corporations for financial gain since at least 2014. The Carbanak gang has
                                been the subject of both media and security reporting due to their high-
                                profile attacks.
                                     The North Korean and Russian-based Odinaff attacks were so similar
                                that, when initially discovered, investigators believed the heist originated
                                from the same North Korean attackers responsible for the previous SWIFT-
                                related attacks. They soon realized that was not the case, but this serves as
                                another example of why investigators cannot let opinion dictate attribu-
                                tion; they must follow the evidence. While the Odinaff attackers were suc-
                                cessful—they were one of a few cybercriminal groups to steal money from
                                financial institutions themselves as opposed to their customers—they did
                                not enjoy the same monetary success as nation-state attackers.


           56       Chapter 2




502147c02.indd 56                                                                                             11/4/21 2:58 PM
                    Conclusion
                           Nation-state financial theft wasn’t a problem for banks prior to the 21st cen-
                           tury. Unfortunately, since 2009, nation-state attackers, including those from
                           Iran, North Korea, and Russia, have conducted attacks that include sabo-
                           tage, financial theft, or denials of service against banks all over the world.
                           The attacking nations have suffered under sanctions; in turn, these sanc-
                           tions then motivated the attacks. For example, North Korea and Iran are
                           under sanctions for developing and testing nuclear weapons. The measures
                           in place restrict economic growth in order to pressure both countries to
                           halt their military development of nuclear weapons. Yet the funds obtained
                           through financial theft often supplement this monetary loss, allowing
                           nations to continue building their military power.
                                In addition to economic motivation, Iran and North Korea conduct
                           attacks to project power in the public eye and to retaliate against alleged
                           U.S.-based or allied cyber operations.40 Attacking financial institutions for
                           substantial monetary gains and with large-scale DoS and sabotage attacks
                           sends a message to the government in which the victim banks reside. Other
                           nations, like Russia, have been sanctioned for military activities as well, just
                           not for those involving nuclear weapons. While not discussed in this chap-
                           ter, Russian attackers usually target financial institutions for retribution
                           purposes and to cause economic turmoil in the targeted nation.
                                The impact of cyberattacks magnifies when bank customers cannot
                           access their money, resulting in negative media attention for the victim
                           organizations. This media coverage causes embarrassment to banks and
                           often results in a loss of customers who may feel their money is no longer
                           safe. It is plausible that in a country with a weakened economy, this type of
                           attack could impact its overall economic posture.
                                While these attacks might sound like plots from spy movies, bear in
                           mind that they actually took place, demonstrating the danger that nation-
                           states pose to financial institutions. Nation-state attackers are possibly the
                           most dangerous and impactful threats that financial institutions face today.
                           While nation-state attacks are rare, the monetary loss from a single attack is
                           far greater than that from traditional cyberattacks. For these reasons, orga-
                           nizations need to handle and respond to them differently, as simply block-
                           ing or mitigating the initial threat will not stop this type of attacker.




                                                                               State-Sponsored Financial Attacks   57



502147c02.indd 57                                                                                                   11/4/21 2:58 PM
502147c02.indd 58   11/4/21 2:58 PM
