“Never sit at a table you can’t walk away from.”
—J o s s W h e d o n




2. but it’s just my
            phone number
You’d be surprised by how far one creep or criminal can get
with your phone number. It’s hard to believe that one little
thing can cause so much trouble, but keeping your private
life under wraps comes down to controlling certain pieces of
information as much as you possibly can. You’re about to find
out exactly what information I’m talking about and how to
protect all of it.

You C on t rol W h at You Sh a r e
It’s really important to safeguard pieces of personally iden-
tifying information, like your phone number, online. Social
media and advertising companies are continually compiling
dossiers on you, trying to match information across services
                   The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                        © 2015 by Violet Blue
18   Chapter 2



and devices in order to piece together the most complete pro-
file they can. The more complete the info, the more valuable
it is when they sell it to and trade it with third parties. From
these third parties, your private information becomes public
in people-search databases. As if this weren’t bad enough,
malicious hackers look for clues to your private information
in everything you do online.
     The armor you build around that identifying information
protects every aspect of your privacy. Of course, what you do
in private or choose to share with friends is your own business.
But if you want to be confident that your information remains
personal, only share identifying info with people you trust.
     For example, if you enjoy sex or explore aspects of your
sexual identity using technology, that experience should belong
to you. Only you should get to decide whether it was a good or
bad thing to do. Sexuality is one of the most important ways
in which we identify, establish, and maintain our boundaries.
Just as importantly, you should get to decide if that experience
(whether it’s sharing intimate photos, talking dirty on the
phone or via voice chat, sexting, having any kind of online sex,
or just disclosing something on a sexual topic) gets shared with
anyone else. Personal information and experiences should be
private and under your control, unless you decide otherwise.
If you do decide to share that information, you should know
exactly what you’re agreeing to.

Pr i vat e Space s a n d Ac t i v i t i e s
Private exploration, sexual and otherwise, is something we do
to better understand ourselves. We experiment with different
ideas about who we are and different ways of expressing our
identities. Sometimes, we may even play around with being
something (or someone) that we’re not like at all in the real
world. Private spaces are where we get to safely figure out
who we are.

                      The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                           © 2015 by Violet Blue
                                       but it’s just my phone number   19

     Privacy is critical to being able to decide what you like,
discover what feels right and wrong for yourself, and findand
keep your boundaries. That’s just the truth and always has
been. What’s changed is the role technology plays in our pri-
vate experiences. If you have a sexual moment in your room,
that moment is still all yours unless you choose to share it.
But when you have a private moment or experience online,
you’re taking a risk with your privacy.
     Until the online revolution, our private spaces for explo-
ration were our bedrooms and bathrooms, our homes, our
phone calls, and our inner fantasy worlds. Now, those spaces
can include texts, emails, photos, videos, and direct messages
to trusted friends or family members. Online, private spaces
include email inboxes, chat rooms, Internet Relay Chat (IRC),
social media profiles, not-public messaging systems (Twitter
direct messages (DMs), Facebook chat), dating websites, mes-
sage boards, and all the places where your personal informa-
tion resides. But those spaces are only private if you can really
trust the people you share that information with.
     For example, if you send or communicate something pri-
vate while at work, at school, or even on Facebook, it might
not be private because it might not actually be “yours” any-
more—legally and, to some degree, practically speaking. The
places where you experience private time online and on your
phone are usually watched and monitored by the companies
who host those services, too.
     The problem is that not everyone understands or agrees
on what constitutes a private space online, and some people
don’t know what information they need to protect and keep
private. Even one piece of private information can unlock a
trail that will expose most, if not all, of the other information
it’s attached to (just read Mat Honan’s story in Chapter 3).
     No one has a clear idea about what systems can be trusted
completely, what systems should never be trusted, and which

                 The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                      © 2015 by Violet Blue
20   Chapter 2



systems to watch very carefully. Worse, many online com-
panies, including some of the big ones you’d think you could
trust, have made it their business to take advantage of that
confusion and misplaced trust by leveraging privacy laws
that are way behind the times to collect, sell, and trade your
private information as data, in their databases. That’s a
problem because it takes away your control over things that
could expose or hurt you, like your identifying information
and metadata (detailed background information on you) that
these companies collect when you use their services. The sad
fact is that these companies care about their bottom lines and
their corporate advertisers more than they do about you as a
consumer, so don’t believe otherwise for a minute. Companies
like Twitter, Google, and Facebook need to convince you to
share your private information because their advertisers “need”
access to what rightfully belongs to you.
    But you have a choice, and it’s not your job to keep corpo-
rations wealthy by empowering them to invade your personal
space. Your private information and activities should remain
private, including all of the following:

•    What you say or express in private chat or direct messages
•    What you say or express in emails
•    What you say or express on the phone
•    What you say or express in your personal relationships
•    Your text messages
•    Personal photos that you share
•    Your activity on dating websites
•    Information related to your sexual activities and sexual
     orientation




                      The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                           © 2015 by Violet Blue
                                      but it’s just my phone number   21

•   Information related to your health and medical records,
    including searches, doctor visits, and associated
    communications
•   Information related to your gender identity
•   Time you spend doing things that you want to keep to
    yourself
•   Anything you keep in private files on your computer or
    phone

    Next, I’ll explain what information you should watch most
closely and how to ensure that your private activities stay
private.

L ock D ow n You r Per s ona l ly I de n t i f y i ng
I n f or m at ion
Lots of things tempt us to give up our email address, phone
number, physical address, ZIP code, and so on—sometimes
harmlessly.
    The information you should guard most closely is your
personally identifying information or PII, or just your personal
information. Even a few pieces of PII can be used to identify,
contact, or locate you, allowing malicious people to attack
you, stalkers to find you, and entities to get more information
about you than you want to share. Companies like Facebook
and Google use your PII for profit. Don’t just give it away.
    The following sections list what you should consider per-
sonal information, and each is named after a stoplight color
so you can see which items are critical. The items on the red
alert list can be used directly against you, and you should
never give out or share these with any person, company, app,
or website that you don’t know or trust. The yellow alert list
contains items that you should be very careful with because



                The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                     © 2015 by Violet Blue
22   Chapter 2



malicious hackers and stalkers can use them, but they can’t
hurt you with this information unless they have other pieces
of information, too.
    If anyone or any company asks for any of the items on your
red or yellow lists, be on guard. But don’t freak out if you’ve
already given these things to other companies, no matter
how shady they are. Even when things go screwy, it’s almost
never too late.

Red Alert List
Everything in this section can be used to directly hurt or harm
you, steal your identity, make you physically unsafe, threaten
or expose your loved ones, steal your money, or access your
online accounts. DON’T give this information out, and DON’T
publish it online. DO keep close track of where it has been seen
and who knows about it.
    Red alert items can’t be changed (or are very hard to
change) if something goes wrong, so you should watch what
happens with everything on this list like a mama hawk:

•    Passwords
•    Real, full (family) name
•    Address of your home, workplace, or school
•    Social Security number
•    Government ID numbers (driver’s license number and
     passport number)
•    Date and place of birth
•    Biometric information (fingerprints, facial recognition,
     voice recognition)
•    Computer’s IP address (a unique number that identifies
     your computer on the Internet)



                      The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                           © 2015 by Violet Blue
                                       but it’s just my phone number   23

•   Specific location (geolocation numbers, like those from
    your phone or in tagged photos)
•   Credit and debit card numbers, security codes, and expi-
    ration dates
•   Bank account numbers
•   Answers to common security questions

   Let’s talk for a moment about those answers to common
security questions. These can include your pet’s name, your
mother’s maiden name, the city you were born in, and often
other things that are easy to guess or dig up on your Facebook
profile. A million years ago, when Paris Hilton’s phone was
hacked, the intruder reset her phone’s password by getting one
security question correct: her dog’s name, which was findable
on every gossip site in the world.

N ote   Credit card and bank account numbers are on the red list
        because while they can be changed, you can usually change
        them only after there has been a problem. Passwords can
        also be changed, but anyone that has them also has access
        to much of your red list information.

Yellow Alert List
Yellow items can be used with other information to harm
you, so avoid giving them out unless you trust the people or
companies you share them with. If you choose to share them,
keep a close eye on where they appear and who can see them.
   Some yellow items can be changed if your personal infor-
mation falls into evil hands, but changing them isn’t easy:

•   Name you use day to day, if different from your legal name
•   Primary screen name(s)
•   Email address (if it’s not public)
•   Telephone number

                 The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                      © 2015 by Violet Blue
24   Chapter 2



•    Race, sexual orientation, and gender
•    Mailing address (if it’s different from your residence; oth-
     erwise it’s red)
•    Country, state, and city of residence
•    ZIP code (or postal code)
•    Google Voice number

    Fortunately, you can make dummy versions of yellow items
to use when you don’t trust an app, website, social network, or
person. Google Voice is on this list because if it’s linked to your
cell phone number, getting locked out of your Google account
means that you’ll be locked out of both numbers.

Note    Even if yellow items are revealed to bad entities, they still
        won’t sink your ship. Read more about making a dupe copy
        of your yellow items (and even some Red items) in Chapter 9,
        “Ninja Tricks.”

   If the red and yellow items seem like a lot to manage, or
some of the items have already ended up “out there,” don’t
worry. I’ll show you how to fix and recover from those big
and small privacy mistakes and how to manage your privacy
easily going forward.

Green List
Items on your green list are okay to share. This list includes
information about you that can’t be used to hurt you or that’s
a dummy version of the real thing. For instance, if the num-
bers of your single-use credit card are stolen, you’ll only lose
the amount on the card. That’s way better than losing a real
credit card, which is tied to your credit score and often various
online accounts and could cause a big headache.




                       The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                            © 2015 by Violet Blue
                                       but it’s just my phone number   25

    Here are some examples of Green items:

•   Secondary screen names or account names (say, a throw-
    away email address that forwards to your primary address)
•   Mailing address or PO box
•   Digital, online phone number, such as a Skype number
•   Email addresses that are not linked to a vital service, such
    as your bank account
•   Photos and videos that don’t embarrass you or reveal
    private information
•   Social media profiles on sites where you’re confident you
    understand the privacy settings
•   General likes, favorites, and things you enjoy sharing on
    social media sites
•   Single-use or gift credit cards

    Apply the red, yellow, and green system to apps and online
accounts to judge them for safety. An online account or app
that asks for red information gets a red grade. If an app asks
for a lot of red or yellow information but doesn’t actually
require that information in order to function, same thing:
the site, account, or app is high risk. Even if it has the best
security team in the world, it still gets the red or yellow rating
because if it gets attacked, you’re in more trouble (and have
to do more post-attack cleanup in your life) than with a green
app or account.

Information-Sharing Guidelines
As a rule, don’t give out personally identifying information
too readily. If you wouldn’t give some bus driver or a creepy
mall cop your home address and phone number, remember




                 The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                      © 2015 by Violet Blue
26   Chapter 2



that just because websites ask for (or demand) personal info
doesn’t mean you have to give it to them. And you can often
give fake information to get to the next screen.
    Of course, you have to give real billing information when
you buy things, but if you’re registering with a free site that
feels like it’s getting too nosy about your business, give it fake
information. You’re not breaking any law under the sun if
you do that. Just don’t use someone else’s real address; you’ll
definitely get in trouble for that.
    Don’t be fooled by websites that offer some sort of reward
or prize in exchange for your contact information or other
personal details. Usually, your name, browser and computer
information, and email address are worth much more to them
than whatever they’re offering you because they can sell your
information to other marketers, who will also resell it. You
won’t win an iPad, but the marketer will win a few more bucks
if you give them your information. And female data sets are
always worth more on the market than male ones, because
women usually make more buying decisions and spend more
money than men. (We’re also worth more on the black market
for seedy things like hacked webcam access, as mentioned in
the story about Miss Teen USA in Chapter 1.)
    A couple more things: avoid sending highly personal email
to mailing lists and keep sensitive files only on your home
computer. Your workplace or school is legally monitoring your
Internet use and email on its network, so don’t do anything
private or sensitive in nature (like banking) on a work or
school network. In most countries, employees have little if any
privacy protection from monitoring by employers.

H e S a i d, Sh e S a i d
Maybe you’re thinking, “Eh, if my phone number gets in the
wrong hands, it’s really not that that big of a deal. I can always
block the caller or hang up. Who cares, right?”

                      The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                           © 2015 by Violet Blue
                                       but it’s just my phone number   27

    Let me tell you a story.
    Every year in Germany, the world’s longest-running
hacker conference happens just after Christmas—Chaos
Communication Congress (CCC). My bosses at CBS have
never seen a great reason for me to fly from San Francisco to
Hamburg to find news at some hacker gathering to report on
over the holidays, when they’re all away from the office with
their families on the US East Coast. But one year, my inter-
est in hackers and cybercrime got my editors to pay attention
to my trip.
    I was on my way to the airport Christmas Eve when I got
some cryptic Twitter messages from hackers who had told
the popular photo-sharing service Snapchat (which suppos-
edly “disappears” your photos after you send them) that the
service had a security problem. Snapchat ignored the hackers’
warning.
    Those same hackers messaged me to say they had found
more serious problems with Snapchat and they had written
a blog post about it. Right after I broke the news for CBS,
malicious hackers took the user information—which included
the user’s name (the name they registered with), display na,e
(handle), and phone numbers—and published all of it online.
    On the long flight to CCC, I started chatting with a woman
seated next to me about the news story. I explained that parts
of Snapchat’s huge user information database had been posted
online for anyone to download and rifle through, and that the
guys who ran Snapchat didn’t seem to care.
    She asked me whether names, phone numbers, email
addresses, or even passwords were online. I told her that as
far as we could tell, it was only usernames and phone num-
bers so far.
    Her boyfriend, seated on the other side of the aisle, was lis-
tening, and he chose that moment to chime in. “Phone numbers


                 The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                      © 2015 by Violet Blue
28   Chapter 2



and names? That’s it?” he said. “Oh if it’s just phone num-
bers and our names, whatever.”
    His girlfriend didn’t agree. It was awkward.
    This could have been a story about any app, or any of a zil-
lion privacy breaches in the past couple of years. It isn’t a story
about “right” or “wrong” ways of thinking about privacy. Their
reactions just show a great example of the difference between
what women and men see as risky exposure. He didn’t think it
was a big deal for anyone to have his number, username, and
real name. She, on the other hand, said it made her worried.
    What my seatmate’s boyfriend didn’t consider is that he
could also be a stalking victim—straight guys attract psy-
chos, too. Creeps and stalkers come in all genders and sexual
orientations. Men tend to feel a greater sense of physical and
social safety, but that feeling is often illusory. Men are vic-
tims of malicious activity online all the time, as I’ll describe
in Chapter 3 with journalist Mat Honan’s story.

Wor st- Ca se Sce na r io
The sad fact is that women have more reasons to be concerned
about online privacy than men do, because women are at
greater risk for physical violence and are directly targeted
more often than men.
    What’s the worst thing that usually happens to a man’s
phone number? Someone posts it on Craigslist (or 4chan) in a
“call and talk dirty to me” ad. A malicious hacker could then
use it to try to reset a password or to try to steal the person’s
identity (which is actually pretty bad).
    But think about what could happen to a woman. Identity
theft is awful, but it’s not the worst thing. Say you have an
online enemy, like an ex or any psycho who’s angry, missing
you a little too much, unhinged, drunk and upset, or bent on
revenge. If that person knows or even suspects that you use


                       The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                            © 2015 by Violet Blue
                                      but it’s just my phone number   29

a particular online app like Facebook or Twitter, they can
search the app using the information they have (any piece of
a real name, username, or phone number) to see if they can
find your current information.
    Once they get more real information about your world,
that stalker, creep, or vengeful ex gets closer to you. They
can use your information to try to see what you’re up to or,
worse, to spy on you, stalk you, or harass you—whether as
their real self or with a fake account. Once a heartbroken ex
or stalker knows what account to zero in on, they may create
a fake account and “friend” you.
    Now they can track, harass, bully, and scare you. They
can search for your username on other social media sites and
apps, like photo sites where you post pictures of your boy-
friend, family, pets, school, travels, and workplace. They can
search social media sites for a history of your relationships,
meaningful or painful experiences, and more. They can use
location-tracking websites to follow you and your friends and
family. The ways in which companies have woven together our
identifying information online means that something as basic
as your phone number needs to be protected more than ever.
    When that stalker gets your phone number, you’re in
trouble. With that number in hand, that bad person can
call you, find you in online databases, make changes to your
accounts and services, or even hack your voicemail.
    And it doesn’t end there: anyone bent on vengeance will
add your number to the dossier they’re building about you,
likely with the intent to publish it online later, along with
your name, usernames, email addresses, and a list of online
apps, accounts, and businesses you use. And I’m not talking
about signing you up for magazine subscriptions and pizza
deliveries, though jerks will do that, too.




                The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                     © 2015 by Violet Blue
30   Chapter 2



    I don’t have to tell you that exes and stalkers do bad things
in real life when they get close enough to the person they’re
obsessed with. If the malicious creep has posted things online
about you to ruin your reputation, like impersonating you
or publishing revenge porn of any kind, they could add your
phone number to this awful public smear campaign—putting
you at serious risk for more stalking and attacks from others.




                      The Smart Girl's Guide to Privacy
                           © 2015 by Violet Blue
