                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f u l or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ll
   M a s ter




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o
   the art                                                                                                                                                                                                      IAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                    UNOFFIC


                                                                                                                                                                                         T he L EGO
  o f L E GO               ®
                           ®




                                                                                                                                                     edition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ®
  Bu il din g




                                                                                                                                                       2nd
                                                                                                                                                                                      Buil der’s Guide




                                                                                                                                             T he L E G O B u i l d er’ s G u i d e
What’s the difference between a tile and a plate?                         Of course, the real fun of LEGO building lies in




                                                                                                                                                                         UNOFFIC
Why isn’t it a good idea to stack bricks in columns                       creating your own models—from choosing the                                                                                 2 n d   e d i t i o n
to make a wall? How do you build a LEGO mosaic                            subject to clicking that final brick into place. Learn
or build at different scales? You’ll find the answers                     how in The Unofficial LEGO Builder’s Guide.




                                                                                                                                                                             IAL
to these and other questions in The Unofficial LEGO
Builder’s Guide.                                                                      ABOUT THE AUTHOR                                                                                              A l l a n B e d f or d

Now in full color, this brand-new edition of a well-                      Allan Bedford is a lifelong LEGO fan and builder




                                                                                                                                                           ®
                                                                                                                                                           ®
loved favorite will show you how to:                                      whose most ambitious model is a 5,000-piece
                                                                          replica of Toronto’s famed CN Tower. An avid
• Construct models that won’t fall apart                                  photographer, Bedford spends his time chronicling
• Choose the right pieces and substitute when                             the streets and people of his adopted hometown,
  needed                                                                  Toronto.

• Build to micro, jumbo, and miniland scale
                                                                           Includes the Brickopedia, a visual dictionary
• Make playable board games out of LEGO pieces                             of nearly 300 of the most commonly used LEGO
                                                                           elements
• Create photo mosaics and curved sculptures

• Build a miniature space shuttle, a minifig-sized
  train station, and more

                                                                                                                                                                                          Overlap
                                                                                                                                                                                        Technique




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hybrid
                                                                                                                                                          B e d f or d

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Co l u m n

              T h e F i n e st i n G e e k E n t e rta i n m e n t   TM                                                                                                                 Stagger
                                                                                                       $24.95 ($25.95 CDN)
              w w w.nost arch.com                                                                                                                                                     technique
                                                                                                                              Hobbies/LEGO
                                                                                                                              Shelve in:
                                   6
        M i c rosc a l e Bu i l d i n g:
       Mo r e T h a n M e e t s t h e E y e




In Chapter 5, I showed you some macroscale building
techniques that you can use to make models much
larger than real life. In this chapter you’ll learn how
to build things that are smaller than real life using a
technique called microscale building.
    If you’ve got a limited supply of LEGO bricks, or if you build in a
confined space, microscale might work well for you. You’ll still be able to
create interesting models, but they’ll use fewer pieces than larger versions
and take up less space—sometimes a lot less space. Just 7 inches long, the
microscale cargo ship in Figure 6-1 captures many of the details of the real
thing, including shipping containers, the bridge, and a smokestack.
    In order to standardize the scale for microscale building, some LEGO
builders have decided to use a 1×1 cylinder to represent the size of a per-
son within the microscale world. In other words, one brick in model height
equals roughly 6 feet in the real world.



          The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
                        ©2012, Allan Bedford
                 Figure 6-1: Microscale works well when the real-life inspiration is huge.

                     In fact, the actual scale of microscale building can vary from model
                 to model, but the principle is always the same: Microscale models are
                 extremely small versions of very large things.


     Getting Started: Ignore the Details
                 In Chapter 5, we discussed approximation: the building method that gives
                 things the look and feel of real life without necessarily duplicating every
                 detail. That same principle can apply to microscale models. Just look at the
                 thing you are modeling and try to see only the characteristics that stand out
                 the most.
                      But how do you do that? Let’s use the Empire State Building as an
                 example. If you tried to create a minifig-scale version of the Empire State
                 Building, it would have to be more than 26 feet tall! (Minifig scale is about
                 1:48. Because the real building is 1,250 feet tall, you would divide that num-
                 ber by 48 and end up with 26.04 feet as the height of your model.)
                      Most people don’t have enough LEGO bricks to tackle a project that
                 big, but just about everyone has enough bricks to build a microscale ver-
                 sion, which requires far fewer bricks. You’ll just need to leave out details
                 like windowsills, decorative statues, and signs because you won’t find bricks
                 small enough to create those details.
                      One reason that the Empire State Building is relatively easy to build in
                 microscale is that it has a recognizable shape. Bringing it to life in micro­
                 scale involves re-creating that shape with as few elements as possible. Remem­
                 ber, you’re trying to achieve the feeling of the real thing, not building an
                 exact replica.
                      To begin building a microscale model of the Empire State Building, I
                 first sketched the shape of the building on graph paper, as you can see in
                 Figure 6-2. I based my drawing on some images of the actual building that I
                 found on the Internet.




                             The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
86   Chapter 6                             ©2012, Allan Bedford
NOTE   For this next example, I’ve used one of the model design grids (see Appendix B). This
       is graph paper with lines drawn to the same size and shape as real LEGO elements.
       Notice that I’ve drawn only the outline of the building in this first sketch. The silhou­
       ette is the most important part of this model, so I’ve essentially left out all the details.

           How did I know how big to draw my sketch? I didn’t. I just guessed,
       though I knew that I wanted to make it fit on one page or less.
           If you find that your first few drawings are too large or too small or that
       they don’t capture the profile you want, don’t give up. Make a second or
       third sketch, and your plan will likely improve each time.
           Next, I began adding the major details, as you can see in Figure 6-3.




       Figure 6-2: A rough outline of the                  Figure 6-3: I’ve sketched in the main
       building                                            features of the building.




                   The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
                                                          Microscale Building: More Than Meets the Eye   87
                                 ©2012, Allan Bedford
                      Here, I’ve drawn in the main
                 entrance, shaded an indent near the top
                 of the tower, and added the shape of the
                 channel that runs vertically up the cen-
                 ter of the building.
                      Notice that I’ve used different
                 shades of pencil to represent different
                 parts of the building. In some cases, this
                 is to remind me that even though this is
                 a two-dimensional drawing, it’s the plan
                 for a three-dimensional model. I shaded
                 certain areas darker to remind me that
                 they will be closer to the back of the
                 model, like the center channel that
                 runs up most of the building. (I’m not
                 too careful about how my lines meet or
                 how each area is colored in. This is just
                 a sketch; it isn’t meant to be perfect.)
                 Finally, as you can see in Figure 6-4, I
                 added some boxes to suggest windows.
                      Interestingly, this model really does
                 look good in light and dark grey. The
                 simple two-tone effect is just what I’m
                 looking for.


     Translating Ideas into Bricks
                 Now that we have a drawn plan, how do
                 we make this a LEGO model? As you
                 look at the drawing, remember that the
                 main idea of microscale building is to        Figure 6-4: The blueprint for my micro
                 make something as small as possible           marvel
                 but still recognizable. Remember, too,
                 that each of the boxes (or cells) on the
                 design grid is the same height as a standard 1×1 plate. Therefore, three
                 boxes are the height of a standard 1×1 brick (see Figure 6-5).
                      To me, the bottom left and right corners of my sketch (Figure 6-5) look
                 a lot like 1×1 LEGO bricks. Using this relative measure, I can quickly figure
                 out which bricks and plates to use to construct the rest of the building. As
                 you can see in Figure 6-6, I’ve put some light and dark grey plates on my
                 sketch to try out the elements I’ll use to build the real model. Although
                 these may not be the exact pieces I’ll use, they give me a sense of which
                 types of elements I’ll need.




                            The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
88   Chapter 6                            ©2012, Allan Bedford
       Figure 6-5: A portion of the blueprint                Figure 6-6: A comparison between
       showing how a 1×1 brick compares to                   actual elements and the partial plan for
       the design I’ve laid out                              the model


            Notice in Figure 6-6 that I have
       represented only some of the windows,
       and even then I’ve used only dark grey
       plates to give the feel of windows. As
       I continue to match the sketch with
       appropriately sized elements (based
       on the 1×1s I started with), it doesn’t
       take long for a little building like
       this to come together as the finished
       model shown in Figure 6-7.
            Notice that this model is con-
       structed almost entirely of plates. You
       won’t build every micro model out of
       plates, but in general, the smaller size
       of plates offers you greater creative
       control at microscale.
            Of course, you may not have the
       right number of light and dark grey
       plates to make this replica of the
       Empire State Building, but don’t let
       that stop you. Try building one from
       bricks alone to see if you can match
       the shape. Or try using other colors to
       come up with your own version.

NOTE   You can find complete instructions for both
       the cargo ship in Figure 6-1 and the Empire
       State Building in Figure 6-7 at http://
       nostarch.com/legobuilder2/.                           Figure 6-7: Real life brought down to
                                                             size—micro size!




                   The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
                                                           Microscale Building: More Than Meets the Eye   89
                                 ©2012, Allan Bedford
                 Reviewing the Technique
                 When building microscale models you’ll follow three simple steps:

                 1.   Sketch out the object’s edges. Identify the outline of the object you’re
                      building and ignore the details to get the basic shape.
                 2.   Identify the features. Look for major features, especially interesting
                      shapes or patterns that help give the object its characteristic look.
                 3.   Discover the details. Choose some of the object’s finer details to model.
                      Be careful to select only things that are critical to its overall feel.

                      You don’t really need to use paper and pencil to work out the design
                 of your model. Sometimes you’ll find it more fun to just dig through your
                 LEGO bricks and work through the steps with the real elements in your
                 hands. When you make mistakes, take things apart and rebuild. And look
                 for those mistakes that actually end up being better solutions than the ones
                 you originally had in mind. Whether you decide to plan your model with
                 paper and pencil or choose to jump in and start building, the benefit is that
                 you are thinking in three dimensions and solving problems as you go.


     Replacing Full-Size Parts with Microscale Stand-Ins
                 Now for a couple more microscale techniques. In this section we’ll look at
                 two different classes of parts (wheels and windows) and learn how to simu-
                 late them at microscale.

                 Microscale Wheels
                 Most LEGO wheels are the appropriate size for minifig or miniland scale, but
                 they are much too large for microscale. As an alternative, try using 1×1 cyl-
                 inder plates turned so that they are sitting on edge, as shown in Figure 6-8.




                 Figure 6-8: A simple microscale truck with 1×1 cylinder plates for wheels
                             The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
90   Chapter 6                             ©2012, Allan Bedford
             The transport truck shown in Figure 6-8 shows not only how to create
        microscale wheels but also how to turn bricks on their sides to create cer-
        tain shapes or patterns. See how I’ve created a white stripe down the length
        of the trailer?
             The trailer portion of the truck is created by stacking 1×2 bricks on top
        of each other. Those stacks are then sandwiched between 2×3 plates. The
        entire trailer section is then turned so that the studs are facing the back of
        the vehicle.

        Microscale Windows
        Like the wheels, many LEGO window elements just won’t look right as win-
        dows at microscale. You saw that I used plates as windows in the Empire
        State Building earlier in this chapter. For models based on smaller build-
        ings, you can use something like the 1×1 headlight brick with its side stud
        facing inward to create a window. Several of them placed together create
        the impression of a picture window in the house shown in Figure 6-9.




        Figure 6-9: This house is much too small for minifigs but just right for a microscale suburbia.

            Notice that the door to the house is merely suggested by the white
        area to the right of the windows. This is really just another example of the
        technique I used to suggest the windows for the Empire State Building.
        Sometimes a change in brick color or depth is all it takes to give the illusion
        that a particular feature exists when it really doesn’t.


Instructions for Building a Microscale House
        The little house shown in Figure 6-9 is a simple model you can probably
        build from pieces in your collection. Figure 6-10 shows the Bill of Materials
        for this micro-mansion. This is followed by a series of figures (Figures 6-11
        through 6-16) that show the building steps.
                     The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
                                                             Microscale Building: More Than Meets the Eye   91
                                   ©2012, Allan Bedford
                 Figure 6-10: The Bill of Materials for the microscale house




                 Figure 6-11: Step 1. The white 1×1 brick sits on an offset plate,
                 in what will become the doorway.




                 Figure 6-12: Step 2. Install the front windows, which are
                 1×1 headlight bricks facing backward.



                              The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
92   Chapter 6                              ©2012, Allan Bedford
Figure 6-13: Step 3. Place a 1×6 plate near the top front to help
hold the windows in place.




Figure 6-14: Step 4. Start the roof. The slopes on the left should
hang over the edge of the wall.




Figure 6-15: Step 5. Place the 1×2 Technic brick in the top center
and attach a transparent 1×1 cylinder plate.
             The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
                                                    Microscale Building: More Than Meets the Eye   93
                           ©2012, Allan Bedford
                 Figure 6-16: Step 6. Complete the roof with a couple of handy
                 peak elements.



     Review: Things to Build in Microscale
                 When building in microscale, you may find it best to pick objects that are
                 naturally very large for your models, like a car, a skyscraper, or even an air-
                 craft carrier. Here’s a short list of things that might make good subjects for
                 microscale building:

                     Automobiles                              Houses
                     Trucks                                   Apartment buildings
                     Buses                                    Dinosaurs
                     Locomotives                              Zoo animals
                     Train cars                               Amusement park rides
                     Spaceships from movies                   Skyscrapers
                     Stores or a mall                         Pyramids
                     Construction equipment                   Ships
                     Hotels                                   Aircraft carriers
                     Castles                                  Bridges
                     Monuments


                      Of course, these are just suggestions, and like everything else in the
                 LEGO system, there are no limits to how you apply your own imagination
                 and creativity. Microscale building is an excellent technique to explore
                 when your collection of LEGO elements is limited in size. As you’ve seen,
                 this restriction doesn’t have to limit the scope of your microsized LEGO
                 world.


                               The Unofficial LEGO Builder's Guide, 2nd Edition
94   Chapter 6                               ©2012, Allan Bedford
