                   HOW FLL WORKS
                                  2
FLL is a unique competition. Unlike science fairs or
robotics competitions, it consists of a wide range of
team challenges that require individuals to combine
many different skills to excel.
     A new team may find the many aspects of FLL a little confusing at first.
If this describes you, we’d like to help! In this chapter, we’ll explain each
category of the competition and how it works.
     Although FLL is sometimes thought of as a robotics competition—like its
counterparts FIRST Tech Challenge (FTC) and FIRST Robotics Competition
(FRC)—robotics actually make up only half of the challenge. FLL has four
different categories:

    Robot Game
    Project
    Robot Design
    Teamwork

                      FIRST LEGO League
       (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                        No Starch Press
                        These categories are combined into exciting competitions called
                    tournaments. The following sections give an overview of tournaments and
                    then describe the specifics of each category.

     Tournaments
                    Tournaments are the climax of an FLL season. At a tournament, teams deliver
                    their Project presentations, attend Robot Design and Teamwork interviews,
                    and compete in the Robot Game.
                         Regions throughout the world host championship tournaments. The
                    winners of these tournaments move on to the next level; qualifying tourna-
                    ment winners move on to the state tournament and so on. For example, in
                    the United States, winners of state championships compete in national or
                    international invitational tournaments.
                         The World Festival is a huge international invitational tournament
                    composed of some of the best teams from around the world. Although it
                    isn’t the culmination of all championships, it is one of the most celebrated
                    and prestigious tournaments. Learn more about upcoming FLL tournaments
                    in your area on FLL’s website, http://www.firstlegoleague.org/.

     Robot Game
                    The Robot Game is one of the robotic categories of FLL, and it is one of the
                    most well-known and exciting parts of the competition. For this challenge,
                    teams have three to five months (the actual time depends on the region)
                    to build and program a LEGO MINDSTORMS robot to autonomously
                    accomplish several missions on a 4-by-8-foot playing field in two-and-a-half
                    minutes. Autonomous means that the teams may not remotely control the
                    robots. The robots compete for points by accomplishing as many missions
                    as possible during a match.

           NOTE     The two-and-a-half-minute time frame during which robots attempt their missions is
                    called a match. A round consists of each team at a tournament completing one match.
                         At the beginning of each new FLL season, teams receive a kit that includes
                    a field mat, LEGO pieces, instructional materials, and other supplies to get
                    started. Let’s review these supplies, starting with the field mat.

                    Field Mat
                    The field mat is a flat, flexible, 4-by-8-foot plastic mat that makes up the area
                    on which the robots compete. Graphics on the mat depict a virtual environ-
                    ment related to the competition theme. For example, the mat for the 2005–
                    2006 Ocean Odyssey season pictured an ocean environment. Figure 2-1
                    shows the field mat used during the 2007–2008 Power Puzzle season.



                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
12   C ha pt er 2
       Figure 2-1: Field mat used during the Power Puzzle season

           The mat should be set on a hard, smooth, and level surface, surrounded
       by 4-inch-high black borders (usually made out of 2-by-4-inch pieces of
       wood). At tournaments, the mats are usually set on custom-made tables, but
       teams can use other surfaces and borders for practice.

NOTE   It’s fairly easy to build an official table. Find instructions for doing so on the “Field
       Setup” page of the FLL challenge website. We suggest that you use an official table to
       practice to make your preparation as realistic as possible.
            Although most graphics on the field mat are decorative, some represent
       scoring areas where certain objects (or even the robot) must be delivered to or
       taken away from to score points. Other graphics are represented for strategic
       reasons. For example, black lines may be part of the virtual environment (such
       as roads), but a robot’s Light Sensor may also use them for navigation. Look
       for features on the mat that might help your robot navigate.
            Field mats also include an area called Base, which is the robot’s starting
       point. The Base is a three-dimensional area 16 inches (40 cm) high, sur-
       rounded by graphics and one side of the field. Figure 2-2 shows the Base on
       the Power Puzzle mat.
            At the start of each round, the team’s robot must be completely inside
       the Base area, which restricts the size of the robot and ensures that all robots
       start each round in the same place. Also, if the robot must be rescued (as
       discussed in “The Match” on page 16), it must be completely inside the Base
       before it can autonomously start again.


                               FIRST LEGO League
                (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                 No Starch Press
                                                                               How F LL Wor ks   13
                    Figure 2-2: The Base for the Power Puzzle season, bordered by three road
                    graphics and one side of the table


                    Mission Models
                    Mission models are the LEGO constructions that are involved in all missions.
                    For example, a mission might require robots to push a lever on a building
                    made out of LEGO pieces, which is a mission model.
                         The Field Setup Kit contains a bunch of LEGO pieces that make up the
                    mission models, as well as a CD with instructions on how to build them. For
                    example, Figure 2-3 shows the mission model components for the Power
                    Puzzle season.
                         Building the mission models is a great activity for a first team meeting as
                    a warm-up or introduction. The building itself can take a few hours, so it
                    might be helpful to print out the instructions so multiple people can build
                    at the same time. On the other hand, if the team wants to start on the robot
                    right away, one member may want to build the models during spare time.
                         Once you build the mission models, attach them to the field mat with
                    Dual Lock—a fastening material similar to Velcro—which comes with your
                    Field Setup Kit. The field mat shows where to place the mission models and
                    the Dual Lock.

           NOTE     If you’re not sure how to use Dual Lock, FLL has instructions on how to use it, along
                    with other useful field setup instructions, on its website.




                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
14   C ha pt er 2
Figure 2-3: Mission model LEGO pieces for the Power Puzzle season

    Mission models create a variety of challenges for robots, which usually
have to perform the following four types of actions with the models:

    Transfer the model
    Activate the model
    Deliver an object to the model
    Remove an object from the model

Transferring a Model
This action involves moving a mission model from one location on the mat to
another. When a mission involves this action, the model that will be moved is
not attached to the mat with Dual Lock—it simply rests in a specified position.
For example, in the Power Puzzle season, the Hydro-Dam had to be moved
on the mat from Base to a river so that the model touched both banks of the
river without touching any of the houses nearby.

Activating a Model
Activating a model involves doing something to make it react in a specific
way. For example, in the 2006–2007 Nano Quest season, the Self-Assembly
mission required the robot to flick a lever on the mission model to start a
chain reaction. Models that require an activation action are usually attached
to the mat with Dual Lock so the robots can activate them without moving
the entire model.



                       FIRST LEGO League
        (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                         No Starch Press
                                                                    How F LL Wor ks   15
                    Delivering an Object to a Model
                    Sometimes a mission model includes an object that isn’t attached to the
                    main model. Instead, this object usually starts in Base, and the robot has to
                    deliver it to a specified place on the main model. In the Nano Quest season,
                    for example, one mission required robots to deliver an object from Base to a
                    mission model and drop it onto a lever that then caused a wheel on the model
                    to spin.

                    Removing an Object from a Model
                    Some missions require robots to remove one or more objects from a mission
                    model. For example, the Oil Drilling mission of the Power Puzzle season
                    required robots to move three oil barrels from an oil platform and place
                    them safely ashore. Points were deducted from a team’s score if the barrels
                    touched the water (ocean).

                    The Match
                    At a tournament, tables are set up with two field mats next to each other and
                    their four-inch-high borders connected. The mission models are placed on
                    the mats.
                        Two teams compete on a table—one on each field mat. Although they
                    are next to each other, the teams only interact on one mission model that is
                    on the border between their field mats. Sometimes, the two robots compete
                    to accomplish the mission first (with the winner scoring more points). Other
                    times, the teams work together to accomplish the mission, with both teams
                    scoring the same number of points if they succeed.
                        Each team may have two members act as drivers of the team’s robot. The
                    drivers set up the robot in Base before the match, run the programs, and
                    manage the robot during the match. Drivers can change places with other
                    team members, but only two drivers can be at the table at once.
                        When the drivers are ready, the announcer counts down, “3 . . . 2 . . . 1 . . .
                    LEGO!” and the teams start their robots. The robots have exactly two-and-a-
                    half minutes to accomplish as many missions as they can.


                                                   M U L T I P L E RU N S

                        Teams commonly program their robots to perform a mission or two and then return
                        to Base, where the drivers can set it up for more missions. This strategy proves very
                        helpful in competition. First, it enables the team to continually realign the robot so
                        navigation errors don’t accumulate throughout the match. Second, it allows the team
                        to use simpler attachments that need to work for only one or two challenges (as
                        discussed in Chapters 10 and 11). And third, it enables drivers to modify their
                        strategy during a match based on the robot’s performance; for example, retrying a
                        failed mission or skipping a low-point mission to make time for one with a higher
                        point value.



                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
16   C ha pt er 2
              If a robot gets stuck, the drivers can rescue it by picking it up and return-
        ing it to Base, though they risk losing points. They may grab their robot
        without penalty if any part of it is already touching Base—whether to modify
        it, reposition it, run another program, and so on.
              The winner of the Robot Game can be determined in different ways.
        Sometimes teams compete in three or more competition rounds for the
        highest single or combined score. Other times, the top scorers move into
        elimination rounds in which teams compete in pairs and the winners of
        each pair move through successive rounds until one team wins. It’s very
        exciting to watch the Robot Game—and even more exciting to compete in it.

The Project
        The Project is one of the two nonrobotic categories of the FLL competition
        and has a bit of a science-fair style. Teams research and solve a real-world
        problem based on the challenge theme and present their research and
        solutions to their community. Community refers to local organizations, govern-
        ments, companies—anything. The teams are also encouraged to impact their
        community in their research area (discussed in the “Presentation” section)
        and will typically be asked about this during a judging session.
            At the beginning of the FLL season, the details and rules of the Project
        are posted on FLL’s website at http://www.firstlegoleague.org/ (click the link for
        your country, go to the current year’s challenge page, and click The Project).
        The rules describe the Project’s theme, general topic, and any special activities
        the teams have to do as part of the Project.

        Research
        Once the Project rules are posted, each team needs to choose a topic related
        to the theme. For example, in the Nano Quest season, in which the general
        theme was nanotechnology (the manipulation of atoms and molecules), a team
        might have chosen “Nanotechnology in Medicine” as its topic.
             Once the topic is chosen, research it. For many Projects, you need to
        suggest a solution to a problem. For example, in the Power Puzzle season,
        the Project required teams to come up with ways to make a building more
        energy efficient.
             You can perform your research anywhere, but keep in mind that judges
        like to see original research, such as personal interviews with scientists or
        information discovered during the team’s experiments. Be sure to take good
        notes because you’ll include your findings in a presentation that you give to
        members of your community and, ultimately, the FLL judges (learn more
        about the research portion of the competition in Chapter 15).

        Presentation
        Once your team has enough information, create a presentation for the judges
        at your tournament(s). The only requirement is that the presentation is
        shorter than five minutes (including setup), but otherwise, teams can give
                             FIRST LEGO League
                (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                 No Starch Press
                                                                           How F LL Wor ks   17
                    just about any kind of presentation they want. Possible presentation styles
                    include PowerPoint presentations, plays, videos, speeches—even operas!
                         Whatever your presentation, include as many team members as possible to
                    demonstrate good teamwork and to show that the entire team contributed to
                    the Project. The number of participating team members will probably affect
                    your score. If many or all of the members participate, your score will most
                    likely be higher than if only a few participate.
                         During the presentation, identify the real-world problem you researched
                    and your proposed solution, and discuss the research you performed. Make
                    sure the team members know the material well and can clearly and smoothly
                    present their pieces without reading from notes.
                         The judges will then ask the team members questions related to the
                    presentation. Among other things, they look for evidence that the members
                    did all the work and have a good understanding of the information related
                    to their presentation.

                    Sharing Your Project with the Community
                    In addition to presenting your Project to the judges, remember that part of
                    the Project includes presenting your research and solutions to the community.
                    One of the goals of FIRST is to get students interested in science and tech-
                    nology, so judges like to see evidence that a team has reached out to the
                    community—the more, the better. Presenting scientific and technological
                    results is important to scientists or engineers, and this aspect of the challenge
                    gives team members valuable real-world experience in public speaking.
                         You can share your Project in several different ways. One common and
                    effective way is to give your presentation for a group, such as a school, club,
                    or even a senior living facility. Many seniors love seeing students learning
                    about breakthroughs and accomplishments in science and technology that
                    weren’t around when they were young.
                         You might also consider adding some extras to your presentations. For
                    example, give a short talk about FIRST and FLL, or offer more detail than
                    you are able to give in the tournament (where presentations are limited to
                    five minutes). You could even demonstrate your robot to make things more
                    exciting.
                         Another kind of community outreach involves working with govern-
                    ment or private organizations to impact your community in the area of your
                    research. For example, if a team picked “Nanotechnology in Medicine” for its
                    Project in the Nano Quest season, they could have talked to an area hospital
                    about implementing some of the technology they researched. Even if the
                    organization doesn’t use your suggestions, the simple fact that you worked
                    with them and tried to make an impact on the community is a nice addition
                    to your Project. It will help your score, and best of all, it is a tremendous learn-
                    ing opportunity for the team.




                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
18   C ha pt er 2
Robot Design
       In the Robot Design category of the competition, judges give a subjective score
       of the robot’s design.
            The judges will ask about the design of your robot in an interview called
       the technical interview (or Robot Design interview). For example, they’ll probably
       ask how your robot works, how you built and programmed it, and how you
       overcame obstacles with its design. Many times they have a table set up with
       a field mat so you can show your robot in action. The judges look for well-
       designed robots that can accomplish missions in consistent, clever, and/or
       unique ways. They also look for evidence that the team members did all of the
       work on the robot (without the help of coaches or mentors) and evaluate the
       ways the team approached their particular design challenges.


Teamwork
       The Teamwork category focuses on team dynamics—how team members
       work together. Your score for this category is partly based on how well you
       perform in an interview with the tournament judges. In evaluating teamwork,
       the judges consider the following categories, taken directly from the FLL
       rubrics (each is explained below):

           Team roles and responsibilities
           Gracious professionalism
           Problem solving
           Enthusiasm and member participation
           Understanding of FLL values

           Judges have multiple ways of determining how well teams do in each
       category. For example, in the Teamwork interview, they may give the team
       a challenge, then make an evaluation based on how the team tackles that
       challenge. They also watch teams throughout the tournament and sometimes
       interview a team at their pit area (the team’s home base).

       Team Roles and Responsibilities
       When evaluating the team in the roles and responsibilities category, the judges
       like to see teams that assign specific roles and distribute work among the
       members. For example, is there a Lead Programmer or Battery Manager?
       The judges also like to see members covering for each other as necessary. For
       example, if one member is sick, does another cover for that person? Chapter 6
       discusses ways to determine team roles.




                              FIRST LEGO League
               (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                No Starch Press
                                                                        How F LL Wor ks   19
                    Gracious Professionalism
                    Gracious professionalism is one of FLL’s core values. The FLL Coaches’
                    Handbook describes gracious professionalism as follows:
                            Gracious attitudes and behaviors are “win-win.”
                            Gracious folks respect others and let that respect show in their
                            actions.
                            Gracious professionals make a valued contribution in a manner
                            pleasing to others and to themselves as they possess special
                            knowledge and are trusted by society to use that knowledge
                            responsibly.

                         Put simply, gracious professionalism means acting graciously and respectfully
                    to teammates, other teams, and visitors to the competition. For example, if
                    some of the teammates disagree about what to include in the Project presen-
                    tation, the judges will expect the teammates to listen to one another and
                    professionally resolve the disagreement. Gracious professionalism also applies
                    to interactions with other teams (you might also call this good sportsmanship).
                    For example, although this is a competition, the winning team should not
                    attempt to put down the losing teams. By the same token, if one team loses a
                    piece at the tournament and another team loans an extra to them, judges
                    viewing the action will most likely increase the loaning team’s score.

                    Problem Solving/Team Dynamics
                    The Teamwork judges are also interested in how teams overcome obstacles or
                    solve problems they encounter. For instance, if a robot starts acting strangely
                    the day before the tournament, the judges will probably be very interested
                    in hearing how the team tackled that challenge. They look at how the mem-
                    bers work together as a team, regardless of whether or not they ultimately solve
                    the problem. The judges like to see evidence that all the members helped to
                    solve the problem, working together and respecting one another’s ideas.

                    Enthusiasm/Participation
                    During the interview, the judges look at how teams answer questions to see
                    how enthusiastic and confident the members are. They also consider how
                    many team members participate in answering questions; the more, the better,
                    of course.

                    Understanding of FLL Values
                    Finally, judges consider how well team members understand FLL values and
                    how much they learn from the FLL experience. For example, they listen for
                    a demonstrated interest in science and technology on the part of the team
                    members. They also want to hear that the team has learned useful things
                    from participating in FLL, whether they learned how to build and program
                    robots, how to present to large groups, or anything else.
                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
20   C ha pt er 2
Team Challenge
As mentioned earlier, sometimes the Teamwork category includes a surprise
challenge that the team first learns about only in the Teamwork interview.
These challenges differ for each tournament and can include just about any-
thing. For example, one challenge in a tournament during the Nano Quest
season required teams to build the tallest possible structure out of (uncooked)
spaghetti noodles and mini-marshmallows. Teams have a limited amount of
time to attempt the challenge. As they work on the challenge, judges look at
how the members interact, how many participate, and how they perform in
other aspects of the Teamwork category.

Awards
What’s a competition without trophies? FLL tournaments usually give out
several awards. They are often made out of LEGO bricks, like the trophy
shown in Figure 2-4. Most tournaments give out at least the following five
main awards:

    Robot Performance Award
    Robot Design Award
    Project Award
    Teamwork Award
    Champion’s Award




Figure 2-4: An FLL trophy, made out of LEGO pieces

                        FIRST LEGO League
         (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                          No Starch Press
                                                               How F LL Wor ks   21
                         The first four awards are given to the teams who do the best in the
                    respective categories of the competition. The Champion’s Award is considered
                    the highest award in FLL, and it usually determines which team moves on
                    to the next championship tournament. It is based on all four categories of
                    the competition, and each category is weighed equally.

           NOTE     Teams can only win one of the Championship Tournament Awards, unless the winner
                    of the Robot Performance Award, for example, also wins the Champion’s Award. Each
                    team may also win awards in only one championship series.
                        Many tournaments give other awards as well. For example, some reward
                    outstanding coaches or mentors. Others, such as the Rising Star Award, are
                    awarded to teams that give an exceptional performance in some area even
                    though they’re not a winning team.


                                               AU T H O R S N A P S H O T

                        Many of the suggestions in this book are drawn from Jonathan Daudelin’s firsthand
                        experience participating in FLL as the leading member of Team 1221: Built On The
                        Rock during the 2006–2007 season. His team’s robot achieved two perfect scores
                        at the state tournament and won the Champion’s Award. This award earned them
                        an invitation to the World Festival, where Team 1221 and one other team made
                        history by becoming only the second and third teams to achieve perfect scores in all
                        three Robot Game rounds. Besides sharing the First Place Robot Performance
                        Award, his team also won the First Place Innovative Robot Award.




                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
22   C ha pt er 2
STARTING OR BUILDING A TEAM
                                  5
Assembling an FLL team can sometimes be as simple
as pinning a signup sheet to a classroom wall or asking
a group of friends to participate. But the reality of the
situation is that there’s often much more to organizing
an FLL team than a simple show of hands or list of names. Sometimes a team
isn’t formed as quickly (or easily) as you might think. Recruiting and selecting
team members can be time consuming. Sometimes more team members want
to participate than there are team slots. Then there’s the administrative issue
of registering the team.
     This chapter provides some suggestions not only for forming a new team,
but also for selecting members and building an existing team. The methods
discussed are certainly not the only ones you can use, but they are the result of
the experience of several FLL coaches and teams that have struggled with
these issues.
     We start by discussing building a team from the ground up and then move
into managing an existing team in which rookies may join veteran members.
By the end of this chapter, you should have enough information to form a
team and start the season.
                       FIRST LEGO League
        (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                         No Starch Press
     Methods for Starting a New FLL Team
                    Although FLL teams can be created in many different ways, the following
                    covers some of the more common ways.

                    School Programs
                    Many schools participate in FLL with students from a math, science, or other
                    class. This is the most common start for an FLL team; schools frequently draw
                    on their teachers to act as coaches, with parents providing assistance. Schools
                    provide resources such as computer labs, robotics kits, and meeting spaces—
                    all of which a team will require during the season.

                    After-School Programs
                    After-school programs can take on many forms. Sometimes a school provides
                    a program, but often a nonprofit or other business entity supports an after-
                    school program. Like schools, programs such as this can usually provide
                    resources such as computers and robot kits for the teams to be productive.

                    Community and Church Groups
                    Check with your local community centers and churches to determine if they
                    offer a team. Civic organizations and churches often enjoy sponsoring teams
                    as a means of reaching out to the community. Sometimes funding is extremely
                    limited, though, so teams often have to provide their own computers, laptops,
                    and robot kits.

                    Homeschool Groups
                    Many homeschool groups and families participate in FLL for both the
                    experience of competition and for school credit. Homeschooled students
                    must not only make certain that they have access to resources the team will
                    need but that they also fulfill any educational requirements (such as tracking
                    the time spent on activities) as defined for homeschool programs.

                    Motivated Parents or Children
                    Sometimes a parent or child aware of FLL may be all the impetus needed,
                    many times using one of the above means to assemble and support a team.
                    Parents who wish to involve their children have even created small teams of
                    two or three siblings.

     Getting Started
                    Starting a new team from scratch can be easier than reorganizing an existing
                    team. Existing teams frequently have a “this is how we do it” attitude, and
                    new members may feel overwhelmed and a bit shy about expressing their
                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
40   C ha pt er 5
       opinions and suggestions for improvements. New teams do not have to be
       concerned with predefined rules or methodologies, which can allow the
       team some real freedom to explore new ways to work together. So let’s build
       a team.
            The following are the steps we follow when forming a new team:

       1.   Announce that a team is being formed.
       2.   Begin accepting applications with a well-defined deadline.
       3.   Hold your first team meeting (covered in more detail later in this
            chapter and in Chapter 6).

Announcing Formation of a Team
       You can announce that you are forming an FLL team in many ways. Some
       common methods include the following:

            Announcement to parents in a school newsletter
            A community notice in a newspaper
            Phone calls to friends
            An after-school program mailer

            No matter which method you use, be sure that it reaches enough people
       so that you have enough to field a team. FLL teams are limited to 10 students,
       and depending on your announcement method, too few or too many students
       may sign up (see “Selecting Final Team Members” on page 46 for help if you
       find you have more applications than team slots).
            Either way, ensure that no students are left out of the application process
       because they weren’t aware of the announcement. Also, depending on how
       much adult help the coach will have, it may make sense to limit the number
       of team members for manageability; you don’t need to have 10 team members
       to have a successful season.
            When soliciting participation, you may want to include a deadline for
       receiving and reviewing applications, but be careful about making exceptions.
       Applicants should feel that all the team members are participating in a fair
       selection process, and early acceptance of any student applications could
       bring charges of favoritism.
            Finally, briefly explain how you will accept applications. For example, if
       you will require applicants to write a short essay explaining why they want to
       be on the team, mention this in the announcement to allow applicants to
       begin preparing. Likewise, if you will use a simple signup, share that informa-
       tion as well.
            Figure 5-1 shows a sample email announcement, including relevant
       information that an applicant needs to satisfy the application process (down-
       load this sample announcement at http://thenxtstep.com/book/downloads/ ).


                              FIRST LEGO League
               (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                No Starch Press
                                                                     St ar t in g or B ui ld in g a T ea m   41
                    Figure 5-1: An email announcement for a new FLL team


     Accepting Team Member Applications
                    After you announce the team and establish a date for accepting applica-
                    tions, it’s time to start collecting applicants. Possible methods for accepting
                    applicants include one or all of the following:

                        Signup sheet
                        Printed application
                        Interview
                        Essay

                    Signup Sheet
                    A signup sheet is simply a list of people who want to become team members.
                    However, using a signup sheet alone can cause some problems. For example,
                    will team members be selected based on the order in which they sign up? If
                    so, what if a student is sick on the day you post the sheet?
                         Signup sheets also provide little information about the student’s skills
                    or commitment to the new team. If you use a signup sheet, use it only as a
                    method to gather information about interest and the potential size of the
                    team. Then allow for other factors, such as an essay and skills assessment (as
                    discussed below), to help select applicants.

                                           FIRST LEGO League
                            (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                             No Starch Press
42   C ha pt er 5
     Figure 5-2 shows a sample signup sheet (download this signup sheet at
http://thenxtstep.com/book/downloads/ ).




Figure 5-2: A signup sheet is a good start for collecting the names of interested
students.


Printed Application
Requesting that prospective team members complete a printed application
can help a coach whittle down a large applicant pool by providing insight
into each applicant’s commitment and skills. This application would request
parent names, phone numbers, and email addresses, as well as an additional
applicant requirement, such as a written essay (for example, “Why do you
want to compete in FLL?”) or a checklist of skills the applicant brings to the
team. Figure 5-3 shows a sample application.

Interview
Interviewing applicants is a great way to find the most qualified applicants,
but it’s also extremely time consuming. For example, if the interviewer grants
10 minutes to each applicant, interviewing 30 applicants will take more than
5 hours. And this doesn’t include the actual selection process in which you
review your notes and pick the best candidates. If you decide to conduct
interviews, do so only if time permits, and be certain to give every applicant
the same amount of time and identical questions. Take good notes on each
applicant’s responses too.
    One option in lieu of an interview is a questionnaire (which should
supplement the team application, not replace it). Figure 5-4 shows a sample
with a list of 10 questions. Applicants are limited to two to three sentences for
each response to a question. The reviewer assigns a value between 1 and 10
based on the quality of each of the applicant’s responses and then adds up
the values to calculate that applicant’s total questionnaire score. These scores
can then be used as an additional factor in the decision-making process
                        FIRST LEGO
(download this questionnaire    at League
                                   http://thenxtstep.com/book/downloads/ ).
         (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                         No Starch Press
                                                               St ar t in g or B ui ld in g a T ea m   43
                                            S K I LL S AS S E S S M EN T

                    Jessica Mallard, a fifth-grade teacher at Wichita Collegiate School in Kansas,
                    suggests including a “skill cloud,” which is a list of words the applicant can circle to
                    indicate skills and interests, on the application. See an example of a “skill cloud” in
                    Figure 5-3.

                         For students with no experience, I have them circle words in a word cloud that
                         describe them best (logical, artistic, hands-on, mechanical, communicative,
                         etc.) and place them based on whether the answers are more “programmer-
                         like” or “builder-like.” More experienced builders and programmers become
                         Builder 2 and Programmer 2 in their respective groups. Less experienced
                         students are Builder 1 and Programmer 1.




                    Figure 5-3: Use an application to let applicants describe their skills and experience.



                                       FIRST LEGO League
                        (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                         No Starch Press
44   C ha pt er 5
Figure 5-4: A questionnaire can be useful during the selection process.


Essay
An essay can give you just as much insight into a student’s excitement and
commitment to an FLL team as an interview. An essay can provide more detail
about an applicant than the short responses on a questionnaire, but you are
typically limited to one or two essay topics. Some possible essay topics include
the following:

    Why do you want to join an FLL team?
    What are your expectations as a potential FLL team member, and what
    skills or talents do you bring to the team?
    Describe a school project or personal project that you worked on; include
    a description of the types of work you performed and the results of the
    project.
    What are some of your favorite subjects, and how would you incorporate
    them into a position on an FLL team?

    Prepare for the team member selection process by combining all the
applicants’ essays with their respective applications, interview notes, skills
assessments, or questionnaires.



                        FIRST LEGO League
         (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                          No Starch Press
                                                               St ar t in g or B ui ld in g a T ea m   45
                                  10
                          BASIC BUILDING




       Building robots is an art. Using a bunch of pieces to form
       a working robot is quite an exciting accomplishment! As
       it turns out, you can use many techniques to refine your
       skill and proficiency at building LEGO robots. This
       chapter goes over some of these techniques and gives
       general tips on building good robots.
NOTE   Since NXT is the newest system used in FLL, and since RIS may be removed in future
       years, the building techniques discussed here focus on the NXT system. However,
       many methods may apply to the RIS as well.
           Although we discuss several useful techniques in this chapter, the best
       way to enhance your skills is simply to spend time building and experimenting
       with robots. The more you build, the better you become at it!




                              FIRST LEGO League
               (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                No Starch Press
     Using Existing Models
                      Our first helpful tip has nothing to do with building! If you have a hard time
                      coming up with a design or don’t have enough time to create a new one, you
                      might want to simply modify an existing basic design.
                          For example, you probably want to build a mobile robot for the Robot
                      Game. A mobile robot is basically just a chassis that uses two motors and three
                      wheels to move forward, backward, and turn.
                          You may have already built a basic mobile robot or have instructions for
                      building one, such as the TriBot from the Education or Retail Kits. These
                      basic robots are a great beginning because you can modify them to do what
                      you want. For example, you could add a motor that will flip a lever on a
                      mission model or attach an Ultrasonic Sensor to detect an obstacle.
                          Our point is that you can take an existing “generic” design, such as a
                      simple chassis, and modify it to suit your needs. Not only does this eliminate
                      some of the building, but it can also help you get started. After working
                      on some of the missions, you might decide to return to that starting design
                      and make changes.


                                             T E C H T I P : B AS E D ES I G N S

                          Use what you know! Why reinvent the wheel when your team can start a robot design
                          using a preexisting robot? The Internet has readily available designs, such as the
                          JennToo (designed by LEGO MDP/MCP Brian Davis), and you can always use the
                          very popular TriBot design that comes with your NXT-G software tutorials. If time is
                          limited or your team is not very experienced with robot design, start with an existing
                          design and modify it as needed.




     Building from a “Foundation”
                      Building a robot from scratch is trickier than modifying an existing design
                      because you don’t have anything to build “off of.” Rather, you need to put
                      together a bunch of individual pieces.
                           When building from scratch, consider using pieces like an NXT Brick
                      or motor as the “foundation” of the robot. For example, to build a rover that
                      uses two motors, each of which is attached to a rear wheel, start building the
                      rover with these motors. Connect pieces to a motor so that it turns a wheel,
                      and then do the same thing with another motor. Next, connect the two motors
                      so there is a wheel on each side of the robot. Finally, add the front wheels,
                      the NXT Brick, and any other parts you want.
                           Sounds pretty easy, doesn’t it? This simple starting method gives you a
                      sense of direction because it helps you see which pieces to use and where to
                      put them.


                                             FIRST LEGO League
                              (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                               No Starch Press
96   C ha pt er 1 0
Building with Modular Design
        Modular design consists of connecting multiple modules, or components, to
        form a robot. For example, make two modules, each with two wheels and a
        motor that turns them. Then make modules for a robotic hand and the NXT
        Brick, and connect all these modules together to form a rover equipped with
        a robotic arm.
             Using modules when you design can help organize your thought process
        by breaking up the entire robot into smaller, more manageable components
        (which can also reduce your work). Another example is building a module
        for two wheels on one side of the robot and then adding the other two wheels
        by copying the opposite module. Figure 10-1 shows an example of a module
        for a tread.




        Figure 10-1: A module for a tread

            This module consists of a motor that drives a tread. To build a rover that
        uses treads, simply copy this module on the opposite side, connect the two,
        and add an NXT Brick.


Bracing Your Design
        Have you ever had a design that was not sturdy or strong? If so, you probably
        could have fixed the problem by bracing the design. Consider the robot in
        Figure 10-2.




                               FIRST LEGO League
                (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                 No Starch Press
                                                                       B as ic B uil din g   97
                      Figure 10-2: A robot that hasn’t been braced can have a weak structure.

                          What’s wrong with this robot? It isn’t very sturdy, right? The wheels bend
                      away from it, which will harm its performance: The robot might not turn as
                      accurately, and it might move in a slight curve instead of a straight line.
                          Fix this problem by bracing the wheels, as Figure 10-3 shows.
                          The beam connecting the two motors is called a brace, which keeps the
                      wheel mechanisms from moving toward or away from each other. Bracing
                      your designs makes them much stronger. This in turn can improve their
                      accuracy, which is usually important in the Robot Game.




                      Figure 10-3: The robot in Figure 10-2 after being braced with beams
                      connecting the motors




                                              FIRST LEGO League
                               (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                                 No Starch Press
98   C ha pt er 1 0
                        T E CH T I P : W H E EL C AM B ER

     Here’s a new term for you: camber. Camber describes whether the wheels on a
     vehicle (such as a car) are angled inward or outward. A zero-camber wheel is a
     wheel that is angled 90 degrees vertically, or is perfectly perpendicular to the surface.
        For example, Figure 10-3 shows a robot with negative camber, or wheels that bend
     outward. A robot with the motors and wheels directed inward has positive camber.
        You should always try to reduce positive or negative camber because it can prevent
     a robot from moving in a straight line. Even worse, if only one wheel has negative or
     positive camber, it will result in an unwanted curving motion.




Types of Braces
You can brace designs with straight or diagonal braces as Figure 10-4 shows.




Figure 10-4: A straight brace and a diagonal brace

     Diagonal braces are often used to stabilize a long object that is only
connected at one end. For example, suppose a sensor is attached to a pole
that extends several inches above the robot. If this pole is attached in only
one place at the bottom, it will probably bend pretty easily. Adding a couple
of diagonal braces to connect the top of the pole to the robot makes it much
stronger.
     When bracing, it’s a good idea to use three or more contact points
(points where the brace connects to the design) to make the brace stronger,
as Figure 10-5 shows.




                        FIRST LEGO League
         (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                          No Starch Press
                                                                                 B as ic B uil din g   99
                        Figure 10-5: Two contact points versus four

                            The brace with only two contact points doesn’t work as well as the one
                        with four, because the beams with two might rotate. Usually, the more contact
                        points you have, the less your connected objects are likely to rotate and the
                        stronger your brace.

                        Connecting a Brace
                        You can connect a brace in several different ways. One common way is simply
                        to connect a beam to the desired objects using pegs. However, sometimes
                        this doesn’t make a very strong connection, so Figure 10-6 shows two examples
                        of stronger brace connections.




                        Figure 10-6: Two examples of strong brace connections

                            Notice how strong these connections are. They won’t come off unless
                        you push out those little axles! Also notice that if the other sides of the braces
                        had similar connections, each would have four contact points.



                                                FIRST LEGO League
                                 (C) 2008 by James Floyd Kelly and Jonathan Daudelin
                                                  No Starch Press
100   C h ap te r 1 0
