        How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice




                                          B
                                   RESOURCES




                   This appendix contains information to help
                   you get started with the projects. We cover
                  how to find electronic components for pur-
              chase, how to power digital circuits, and how to
        set up a Raspberry Pi.

Buying Electronic Components for the Projects
        Working with electronics and programming in a hands-­on way helps you
        learn the concepts in this book, but trying to obtain various components
        can be intimidating. This section helps you find the electronic components
        you’ll need for the projects.
                       How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

                       Here’s the full list of all the components used in the projects, in case
                   you want to order everything at once:

                   •      Breadboards (at least one 830-point breadboard. You can get by with
                          only one breadboard if you plan to tear down each circuit between exer-
                          cises. If you wish to keep your circuits intact, you need more than one.)
                   •      Resistors (an assortment of resistors. Here are the specific values used:
                          47kΩ, 10kΩ, 4.7kΩ, 1kΩ, 470Ω, 330Ω, 220Ω.)
                   •      Digital multimeter
                   •      9-volt battery
                   •      9-volt battery clip connector
                   •      Pack of 5mm or 3mm red LEDs (light-emitting diodes)
                   •      Two NPN BJT transistors, model 2N2222 in TO-92 packaging (also
                          known as PN2222)
                   •      Jumper wires designed for use in a breadboard (both male-to-male and
                          male-to-female)
                   •      Pushbuttons or slide switches that fit in a breadboard
                   •      7402 integrated circuit
                   •      7408 integrated circuit
                   •      7432 integrated circuit
                   •      Two 7473 integrated circuits
                   •      7486 integrated circuit
                   •      220µF electrolytic capacitor
                   •      10µF electrolytic capacitor
                   •      5-volt power supply (See the section “Powering Digital Circuits” on
                          page 336 for details.)
                   •      Raspberry Pi and related items (See the section “Raspberry Pi” on
                          page 341 for details.)
                   •      Recommended: Alligator clips (These can make it easier to connect a
                          battery to a breadboard or your multimeter to a circuit.)
                   •      Optional: Wire stripper (You may need one to strip away plastic from
                          the ends of wires and expose the copper.)

                       Although this list calls out specific counts for certain components, for
                   some parts, you probably want to buy a few more than the stated number in
                   case of damage or in case you wish to experiment. I recommend a few spare
                   transistors and one spare of each integrated circuit.

                   7400 Part Numbers
                   Finding an appropriate 7400 series integrated circuit (IC) can be challeng-
                   ing, since these chips are identified with part numbers that include more
                   detail than just the 74xx identifier. The 7400 series has a number of subfam-
                   ilies, each with its own part numbering scheme. Plus, manufacturers add

334   Appendix B
How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

their own prefixes and suffixes to the part numbers. This can be confusing
at first, so let’s look at an example. I recently wanted to purchase a 7408
IC, but the part number I actually ordered was an SN74LS08N. Let’s break
down that part number in Figure B-1.




SN74LS08N
 First 2 digits
 indicate the
                    74 = 7400
                    series of logic
                                      Logic
                                      subfamily
                                                  The function
                                                  of the device.
                                                                   Suffix letters
                                                                   are specific to
 manufacturer.      gates, for                                     the
                    commercial        LS = Low-   08 = Quad 2 -    manufacturer.
 SN = Texas         use.              power       input AND
 Instruments                          Schottky    gate, a          N = Through-
                    54 = Military                 derivative of    hole DIP
                    grade                         the 7408         packaging

Figure B-1: Interpreting a 7400 series part number

     So the SN74LS08N is a 7408 AND gate manufactured by Texas Instruments,
in the low-­power Schottky subfamily, packaged in through-­hole packaging. No
need to worry about the details of “low-­power Schottky,” other than to know
that it’s a common subfamily of parts that works for our purposes.
     For the projects in this book, you want to ensure that you use parts
that are compatible with each other. The projects assume that you are
using parts that are compatible with the original 7400 logic levels (5V).
Considering what is readily available, I’d recommend that you buy parts in
the LS or HCT series. So if you want a 7408, you could buy an SN74LS08N
or SN74HCT08N. Generally speaking, you should be able to mix LS and
HCT parts in the same circuit. The prefix letters, SN in this example, don’t
matter when it comes to compatibility; you don’t need to buy parts from a
specific manufacturer. The suffix does matter, since it indicates the package
type. Be sure to get parts that fit on a breadboard—N parts work well.

Shopping
If you happen to have a local electronics store nearby that can supply these
parts, then I’d suggest you visit it. The store employees can help ensure that
you get what you need. However, I’ve found that such stores are increasingly
rare; you may not be able to get everything you need locally.
     Your next option is to shop online. To make things easier for you, I’ve
put together a web page with links to parts you need from various stores:
https://www.howcomputersreallywork.com/parts/. Or if you want to shop around
yourself, Table B-1 is a list of some of the popular stores where you can get
parts; I’ve included notes on each. I’m not endorsing these shops in par-
ticular; you may find parts elsewhere. Of course, the status of these online
stores could change after this book is published.




                                                                                 Resources   335
                     How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

                    Table B-1: Shopping Online for Electronic Components

                     Store                       Comments
                     Adafruit                    Adafruit has a great selection of electronics parts; how-
                     https://www.adafruit.com/   ever, the last time I checked, they don’t carry individual
                                                 7400 series logic gates.
                     Amazon                      Amazon carries popular items like the Raspberry Pi, but
                     https://www.amazon.com/     ordering integrated circuits often either isn’t an option
                                                 or is costly. Some items are only available in packs of
                                                 50 or 100, for example. You probably don’t need 100
                                                 transistors, but if you are a Prime member, it actually
                                                 might be more cost-­effective to buy 100 transistors from
                                                 Amazon than to buy 5 from other stores, once you factor
                                                 in shipping.
                     Digi-­Key Electronics       Digi-­Key is targeted at professionals rather than hobby-
                     https://www.digikey.com/    ists, and the site can be a bit intimidating, but you can
                                                 find integrated circuits here, including the 7400 series
                                                 logic circuits.
                     Mouser Electronics          Mouser is similar to Digi-­Key in that it targets profession-
                     https://www.mouser.com/     als and carries integrated circuits.
                     SparkFun                    As with Adafruit, you can find lots of electronics here, but
                     https://www.sparkfun.com/   no 7400 logic gates, at least when I last checked.
                     Texas Instruments           Texas Instruments manufactures 7400 series logic circuits,
                     https://store.ti.com/       and they also sell them directly through their website.
                                                 I’ve found that their prices are reasonable, and shipping
                                                 options are good.




                         A number of websites are dedicated to helping people find electronic parts.
                    These sites provide a user interface that’s easy to navigate, and they allow for price
                    comparison across multiple retailers. Two that I’ve found useful are Octopart
                    (https://octopart.com) and Findchips (https://www.findchips.com).


      Powering Digital Circuits
                    7400 series logic chips need 5V, so using a 9-volt battery isn’t an option for
                    powering these integrated circuits. Let’s look at some options for powering
                    your 7400 circuits.

                    USB Charger
                    Many smartphone chargers made since 2010 have a micro-­USB connector.
                    Around 2016, USB Type-­C (or just USB-­C) connectors began to become
                    more common. Fortunately, USB of either variety provides 5V DC. So a USB
                    charger, like the one shown in Figure B-2, is great for powering your 7400
                    series integrated circuits. If you’re like me, you may have a bunch of old
                    micro-­USB phone chargers around your home already.




336    Appendix B
How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice




Figure B-2: A micro-­USB phone charger

    However, there’s a challenge; a micro-­USB connector doesn’t plug into a
breadboard, at least not without some help! A good option for using a USB
charger with a breadboard is to buy a micro-­USB breakout board, like the one
shown in Figure B-3. This lets you plug your USB charger into the break-
out board, and the breakout board plugs into your breadboard. Adafruit,
SparkFun, and Amazon all carry these. Some soldering may be required.
These boards typically have five pins, but for this purpose, you only need to
concern yourself with the VCC (5V) pin and GND (ground) pin. When con-
necting this to a breadboard, remember to orient the pins in such a way that
they are not connected to each other, as shown in Figure B-3.




Figure B-3: A micro-­USB breakout board, inserted in breadboard (right)


Breadboard Power Supply
Another option is to buy a breadboard power supply, like DFRobot DFR0140
or YwRobot Power MB V2 545043. These handy devices plug into your bread-
board and are powered by a wall DC power supply with a 2.1mm barrel jack.
The source DC supply should provide a voltage between 6V and 12V (be sure
to verify the specific voltage allowed for the particular board you use). These
2.1mm DC power supplies are fairly common for powering consumer elec-
tronics—you may have several already—and this type of board just makes it
easy to convert the voltage to 5V and connect it to a breadboard. Figure B-4
shows one of these common DC power supplies with a 2.1mm barrel jack
along with a breadboard power supply.



                                                                          Resources   337
                    How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice




                   Figure B-4: A 2.1mm barrel jack power supply and a breadboard
                   power supply

                        One word of caution: I’ve personally seen these boards experience
                   a failure in their voltage regulator, causing the board to output a volt-
                   age higher than 5V. When connecting one of these power supplies, don’t
                   assume that the output voltage is actually 5V. Test the output voltage before
                   connecting your circuit! Using a lower input DC voltage should help reduce
                   this risk as well, so I’d recommend that you use a 9-volt or lower DC power
                   supply, given an allowed range of 6V to 12V. These boards also have the
                   option to output 3.3V instead of 5V, controlled with a jumper setting on the
                   board, so make sure the jumpers are in the correct place.

                   Power from a Raspberry Pi
                   If you’re going to buy a Raspberry Pi for the projects starting in Chapter 8,
                   you’re in luck; it has the side benefit of doubling as a 5-volt power supply!
                   The GPIO pins on the Pi have various functions, but for this purpose, all
                   you need to know is that pin 6 is ground and pin 2 supplies 5V. You can con-
                   nect those pins to your breadboard as your power supply. See Figure 13-11
                   on page 312 for a GPIO pin diagram. There’s no need to even install any
                   Raspberry Pi software, because as soon as the Pi powers on, the 5-volt pin
                   will turn on. Just connect your Pi to power. As a bonus, pin 1 can supply
                   3.3V if needed. To be clear, if you do this, you aren’t using any of the com-
                   puting power of the Pi; it is just acting as a 5-volt power supply. There is a
                   limit to how much current the Raspberry Pi can supply. The power adapter
                   you use for the Pi will have a maximum current rating, and the Pi itself will
                   draw some current, maybe 300mA when idle. This probably goes without
                   saying, but if you go with this option, be careful that you connect your cir-
                   cuit properly; you don’t want to accidentally damage your Raspberry Pi!
                   Figure B-5 shows a Raspberry Pi being used as a power supply.


338   Appendix B
How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice




Figure B-5: Using a Raspberry Pi as a power supply



AA Batteries
You can also use AA batteries to power a digital circuit. A single AA battery
supplies 1.5V, so three AA batteries can be connected in series to provide
4.5V. Although this voltage is less than the recommended voltage for 7400
series components, it should work for the circuits in this book, although
your results may vary. You can buy a battery holder for three AA batteries
and connect its output wires to your breadboard, as shown in Figure B-6.




Figure B-6: Using three AA batteries to power a circuit
on a breadboard

                                                                     Resources   339
                     How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

      Troubleshooting Circuits
                    Sometimes you build a circuit, expecting things to work a certain way, but
                    the result is something else entirely. Maybe the circuit doesn’t appear to do
                    anything, or maybe it behaves in a way you did not intend. Don’t worry, this
                    happens to everyone who builds circuits! It’s easy to make a wiring mistake
                    or to have a loose connection that throws everything off. Troubleshooting
                    and diagnosing problems in a circuit is a valuable skill that can actually
                    help you expand your understanding of how things work. Here I share
                    some troubleshooting approaches that I use when my circuits don’t work
                    as expected.
                         If any component in your circuit is too hot to touch, immediately dis-
                    connect the circuit from its power source. Wiring mistakes can lead to a
                    component overheating. This often causes damage to the component if it’s
                    left connected for more than a few seconds.
                         Your primary tool for circuit troubleshooting is a multimeter. With
                    a multimeter, you can easily check the voltage at various points around a
                    circuit. Ask yourself, “What do I expect the voltage to be at this point or at
                    that point in my circuit?” For 5-volt digital circuits, the expected voltages
                    are usually going to be approximately 0V or approximately 5V. If your meter
                    shows an unexpected voltage anywhere in the circuit, ask yourself, “What
                    things could influence this voltage?” and check those things.
                         For digital circuits, I usually take a “work backward” approach, starting
                    with the component that is misbehaving. Confirm that its output voltage is
                    wrong, and then check its inputs. Is one of those inputs also an unexpected
                    voltage? If so, move back to the component that feeds that input, and check
                    its output. Repeat until you find the source of the problem.
                         When checking voltages, I’ve found that the simplest approach is to
                    connect your black/negative/COM lead to a ground point in your circuit
                    and leave it there. If there isn’t an obvious place to connect the lead to
                    ground, just add a jumper wire to a ground point on the breadboard, then
                    use an alligator clip to connect that jumper wire to your COM lead. With
                    your COM lead anchored to ground, you can easily use your positive lead,
                    usually colored red, to poke around at various points in the circuit and
                    check voltages relative to ground.
                         The other thing I regularly check with a multimeter during trouble-
                    shooting is resistance. Sometimes I know the expected resistance between
                    two points, and I want to verify that resistance value. If there’s more than
                    one path connecting the points you are measuring, be sure you know the
                    expected resistance so you can correctly interpret your measurement.
                         Usually I’m checking resistance to simply ensure that two points
                    are connected, in which case I expect a resistance of approximately 0Ω.
                    Conversely, sometimes I want to ensure that two points are not connected,
                    and then I look for a very high resistance, an open circuit. Some meters also
                    include a continuity check feature, where the meter emits an audible tone if
                    two points are connected. If you are just checking for connectivity, some-
                    times this is preferable to checking resistance.



340    Appendix B
        How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

           Some specific things to verify when troubleshooting:
           Breadboard power Does your breadboard have the appropriate voltage
           along the long power columns? The positive voltage column should equal
           the voltage from your source (say, a 9-volt battery or a 5-volt supply). Be
           sure to check both sides of the breadboard if both sides are in use.
           Breadboard connections Verify that your wiring on the breadboard
           is sound. Are wires fully inserted, or do you have loose connections?
           Double-­check the alignment of connections on the breadboard; is your
           wire in the right row? Is anything extra connected in the row you are
           checking?
           Resistors Are your resistors the correct values? If needed, remove
           each one from the circuit and verify with a multimeter.
           LEDs Are your LEDs oriented properly? The shorter lead should be
           connected closer to ground.
           Capacitors If your capacitor is polarized, ensure you have the positive
           and negative leads properly oriented. Also check the capacitance value.
           Integrated circuits Are your ICs properly connected to ground and
           to positive voltage? Is the chip fully seated in the breadboard, placed
           across the gap in the center? Check that your IC is aligned correctly by
           looking for the notch. Are you using the right part number?
           Digital input switches/buttons When using pull-down resistors, is
           one side of the switch connected to positive voltage, and the other side
           connected through a pull-­down resistor to ground? Is the digital input
           pin on the related chip connected to the same side of the switch as the
           pull-­down resistor?



Raspberry Pi
       The Raspberry Pi is a tiny, inexpensive computer. It was developed to promote
       teaching of computer science, and it has gained a following among technol-
       ogy enthusiasts. It’s our computer of choice for this book, so here we cover the
       basics of setting up and using a Raspberry Pi.

       Why Raspberry Pi
       Before we go into the details of how to configure your Raspberry Pi, I’d like
       to explain why I chose the Raspberry Pi for this book. Some of the projects
       require a computer of some sort to interact with. Now, you may be saying to
       yourself, “I already own a computer; why do I need another?” Yes, since you
       are reading a book on computing you probably already own
       a computer, or maybe several! However, not everyone owns the same kind of
       computer, and some types of computing devices are better suited than oth-
       ers for education. Additionally, some of the projects in this book deal with
       low-­level details of computing, so everyone following along needs the same
       kind of device.


                                                                             Resources   341
                       How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

                       The Raspberry Pi was a natural choice since it’s inexpensive (about
                   $35) and designed with computer education in mind. My goal isn’t for you
                   to switch to the Raspberry Pi as your primary computer or to make you a
                   Raspberry Pi expert. Instead, we use the Raspberry Pi to learn core con-
                   cepts that you can then apply to any computing device. The Raspberry Pi
                   uses an ARM processor, and we’ll be running Raspberry Pi OS (previously
                   called Raspbian) on it, a version of Linux optimized for the Raspberry Pi.

                   Parts Needed
                   First things first, you are going to need to obtain a Raspberry Pi and some
                   accessories. Here’s what you need:

                   •      Raspberry Pi. These are usually about $35 and can be purchased
                          online. At the time of this writing, the latest model is the Raspberry Pi
                          4 Model B, and the exercises in this book were tested with this version
                          and with the Raspberry Pi 3 Model B+. If a newer model is released, it
                          likely will be acceptable as well, given the Raspberry Pi’s track record of
                          backward compatibility. The Raspberry Pi 4 Model B is available in mul-
                          tiple memory configurations (1GB, 2GB, 4GB, and 8GB)—any of them
                          are fine for this book.
                   •      USB-­C power supply (only for Raspberry Pi 4). The Raspberry Pi 4
                          uses a USB-­C power supply. The power supply needs to provide 5V and
                          at least 3A. Certain USB-­C power supplies are incompatible with some
                          Raspberry Pi 4 devices, so I recommend you purchase a USB-­C power
                          supply specifically designed for the Raspberry Pi 4.
                   •      Micro-­USB power supply (only for Raspberry Pi 3). Unlike the
                          Raspberry Pi 4, the Raspberry Pi 3 is powered by a micro-­USB power
                          adapter, like the ones that many smartphones use. If you have a smart-
                          phone charger already, it might work with the Pi. Just be sure that the
                          connector is micro-­USB. The standard voltage output from such char-
                          gers is 5V, but the maximum amount of current they supply varies. For
                          the Raspberry Pi 3, it’s recommended that you use a power supply that
                          can provide at least 2.5A. The current requirements vary depending on
                          what you have connected to the Pi. So check your smartphone charger
                          to see how much current it can supply; you may need to purchase a
                          micro-­USB power supply designed for the Pi.
                   •      MicroSD card, 8GB or larger. The Raspberry Pi doesn’t come with any
                          storage, so you need to add it yourself via a microSD card. These cards
                          are commonly used in smartphones and cameras, so you may have an
                          extra one lying around already. The process of installing Raspberry Pi
                          OS will erase existing data, so be sure to back up anything you have
                          stored on your microSD card.
                   •      USB keyboard and USB mouse. Any standard USB keyboard and USB
                          mouse will do.
                   •      Television or monitor that supports HDMI. All modern televisions and
                          many computer monitors support HDMI connections.


342   Appendix B
How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

•    HDMI cable. The Raspberry Pi 3 uses a standard, full-­sized HDMI
     cable, but the Raspberry Pi 4 has a micro-­HDMI port. Assuming your
     display device accepts full-­sized HDMI input, this means that for a
     Raspberry Pi 4 you need a micro-­HDMI to HDMI cable or adapter.
•    Optional: Raspberry Pi case. This isn’t required, but it is nice to have.
     Note that the Raspberry Pi 3 and Raspberry Pi 4 have different physical
     layouts, so they need differently shaped cases.

    See the “Shopping” section of “Buying Electronic Components” earlier
in this appendix for help getting these parts.

Setting Up a Raspberry Pi
The Raspberry Pi website (https://www.raspberrypi.org) contains detailed
setup guides that walk through setting up a Raspberry Pi. I don’t cover
all the details here since the online documentation already exists, and it
changes over time. Instead let me give you a brief overview of the steps
required.
     You have several options for installing Raspberry Pi OS on your
Raspberry Pi. If you have a computer with a microSD card reader/writer,
the simplest option is to use the Raspberry Pi Imager. Here’s how to use this
tool to get going quickly with your Raspberry Pi:

1.  Insert your microSD card into your computer.
2.  Download the Raspberry Pi Imager from https://www.raspberrypi.org/
    downloads.
3. Install and run the Raspberry Pi Imager on your computer.
4. Choose the operating system: Raspberry Pi OS (32-bit).
5. Choose the SD card you want to use.
6. Click “Write” and Raspberry Pi OS will be copied to your microSD card.
7. Remove the microSD card from your computer.
8. Insert the microSD card into the Raspberry Pi.
9. Connect the Raspberry Pi to a USB keyboard, USB mouse, and monitor
    or TV using HDMI, and finally to the power supply.
10. The Raspberry Pi should boot into Raspberry Pi OS.

    Another good option for installing Raspberry Pi OS is to use the
Raspberry Pi New Out of Box Software (NOOBS). To use NOOBS, down-
load it from https://www.raspberrypi.org/downloads and copy it to a blank
microSD card. If you don’t have another computer available to do this,
you can buy a microSD card with a copy of NOOBS preloaded. In either
case, once you have NOOBS on the microSD card, insert the card into
your Raspberry Pi and power it on. Follow the on-­screen instructions to
install Raspberry Pi OS.




                                                                     Resources   343
                    How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

       NOTE        At the time of this writing, a 64-bit version of Raspberry Pi OS is available as a
                   beta release. However, the projects in this book were tested with the 32-bit Raspberry
                   Pi OS, so I recommend that you stick with the 32-bit version for the projects.

                   Using Raspberry Pi OS
                   Once your Raspberry Pi is set up, I recommend you take a little time to
                   familiarize yourself with the user interface of Raspberry Pi OS. If you’ve
                   used a Mac or a Windows PC before, the Raspberry Pi OS desktop envi-
                   ronment should be somewhat familiar. You can open applications in win-
                   dows, move those windows around, close them, and so forth.
                        That said, most of the projects in the book won’t require you to use
                   any of the Pi’s graphical applications. Nearly everything can be done from
                   a terminal, and most projects require at least some use of the terminal, so
                   let’s take a minute to get familiar with it. From the Raspberry Pi OS desk-
                   top, you can open a terminal window by clicking Raspberry (icon in the
                   upper-left corner)AccessoriesTerminal as shown in Figure B-7.




                   Figure B-7: Opening the Raspberry Pi terminal

                        The terminal is a command line interface (CLI), where everything you do
                   is accomplished by typing in commands. Raspberry Pi OS, like all versions
                   of Linux, has excellent support for the CLI, and you can do just about any-
                   thing from a terminal if you know the right commands. By default, the ter-
                   minal on Raspberry Pi OS runs a shell called bash. A shell is a user interface
                   for an operating system, which can be either graphical (like the desktop)
                   or command line based. The initial text in the bash command line should
                   look something like this:

                   pi@raspberrypi:~ $



344   Appendix B
How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

       Let’s examine each part of that text string:
       pi This is the username of the currently logged-on user. The default
       user’s name is “pi.”
       raspberrypi Separated from the username by an @ sign, this is the
       name of the computer.
       ~ This indicates the current directory (folder) you are working in.
       The ~ character has a special meaning; it refers to the current user’s
       home directory.
       $ The dollar sign is the CLI prompt, an indicator that you can type
       your commands here.
     In this book, when I list commands that should be typed in a terminal,
I prefix the line with a $ prompt. As an example, this command lists the
files in the current directory:

$ ls

    To run a command, you don’t need to type the dollar sign; just type the
text following it, and then press enter. If you want to run a command that
you previously entered, you can press the up arrow on the keyboard to cycle
through previously issued commands.
    If you prefer to work in a terminal, you can set up your Raspberry Pi to
boot directly to a command line rather than to the desktop: Raspberry
PreferencesRaspberry Pi ConfigurationSystem tabBootTo CLI.
Once you’ve made this configuration change, the next start of the system
goes directly to the CLI rather than the desktop. While in a CLI-­only envi-
ronment, if you want to start the desktop environment, just run the follow-
ing command:

$ startx

     As a terminal user, another option is to control your Raspberry Pi from
a different computer or even from a phone by using Secure Shell (SSH) over
the network. The end result of this approach is that your Pi can run any-
where on your network, even without a monitor or keyboard attached, and
you can use the keyboard and monitor of another device to control it. To
pull this off, you must enable SSH on the Pi (RaspberryPreferences
Raspberry Pi ConfigurationInterfaces tabSSHEnable), and then run
an SSH client application on a second device. I won’t include detailed steps
for setting this up, but there are plenty of guides online for how to do this.
     When you are finished working with your Pi for a while, you’ll want to shut
it down gracefully to avoid data corruption, rather than just turning it off. From
the desktop, you can shut down the system with RaspberryShutdown…
Shutdown. Or from a terminal, you can use this command to halt the
system:

$ sudo shutdown -h now


                                                                     Resources   345
                    How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

                       You’ll know the system has completely shut down when the attached
                   monitor no longer displays anything and the activity light on the Raspberry
                   Pi board stops blinking. You can then unplug your Pi.

                   Working with Files and Folders
                   The projects in this book regularly direct you to create or edit text files
                   and then run some terminal commands on them. Let’s talk about working
                   with files and folders in Raspberry Pi OS, both from a command line and
                   from the graphical desktop. Operating systems organize the data on a stor-
                   age device, like the microSD card in your Raspberry Pi, with a filesystem.
                   A file is a container of data, and a folder (also known as a directory) is a
                   container of files or other folders. The filesystem’s structure is a hierarchy, a
                   tree of folders. On Linux systems, the root of that hierarchy is represented
                   with /. The root is the topmost folder—all other folders and files are
                   “under” the root.
                         A folder directly under the root folder would be represented like this:
                   /<foldername>. A text file in that folder would look something like this:
                   /<foldername>/<filename>.txt. Note the .txt file extension, the last part of the
                   filename. It is convention to end a filename with a period followed by a few
                   characters to indicate what kind of data is in the file. In the case of text
                   files, “txt” is often used. The use of file extensions is not a requirement, but
                   it is a common practice, helpful for keeping your data organized.
                         Every user in Raspberry Pi OS has a home folder to work in. The default
                   user in Raspberry Pi OS is named pi, and the pi user’s home folder is located
                   in /home/pi. While you are logged on as the pi user, that same home folder
                   can also be referred to with the ~ character. Let’s say you create a folder in
                   your home folder called pizza. Its full path would be /home/pi/pizza, or when
                   logged in as pi, you can refer to it as ~/pizza. Let’s try creating a pizza folder
                   from a terminal window, using the mkdir command, short for “make direc-
                   tory.” Don’t forget to press enter after typing the command.

                   $ mkdir pizza

                      From a terminal, you can see your newly created folder by using the ls
                   command:

                   $ ls

                       When you type ls and press enter, you should see the pizza folder
                   alongside a set of other folders that were already present in your home
                   folder, such as Desktop, Downloads, and Pictures.
                       The terminal isn’t the only way to view the files in a folder. You
                   can also use the File Manager application, which you can launch from
                   RaspberryAccessoriesFile Manager. As shown in Figure B-8,
                   the File Manager application opens with a default view of your home
                   directory.



346   Appendix B
How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice




Figure B-8: Raspberry Pi OS File Manager

     The left-­hand side of File Manager shows the full filesystem hierarchy of
folders, with the currently selected folder highlighted—pi in this case. The
address bar at the top showing /home/pi indicates the current folder. Now,
try double-­clicking the pizza folder; it should be empty. Let’s jump back to
the terminal window and create some files in this folder. First, let’s change
folders with the cd command (for change directory), so that our current
folder is the pizza folder. Then let’s create two empty files using the touch
command. Finally, we’ll list the contents of the directory with ls, expecting
to see the two new filenames listed.

$ cd pizza
$ touch cheese.txt
$ touch crust.txt
$ ls

    Note that when you changed to the pizza folder, your bash prompt
should have changed as well. It should now include ~/pizza before the $,
indicating the current folder. Now look at the File Manager application
window; it should also show the two new files under the pizza folder, as
shown in Figure B-9.




                                                                     Resources   347
                    How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice




                   Figure B-9: Raspberry Pi OS File Manager: files in the pizza folder

                        Now we have two empty files in the pizza folder. Let’s add text content to
                   the files. First, we’ll edit cheese.txt using a command line text editor called nano.

                   $ nano cheese.txt

                       With the nano editor window open in the terminal, you can type text
                   that will be saved to cheese.txt. Keep in mind that nano is a command line
                   application—you can’t use the mouse. You need to use the arrow keys to
                   move the cursor. Try typing some text, as shown in Figure B-10.




                   Figure B-10: Using nano to edit cheese.txt

348   Appendix B
How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

     After typing in some text in nano, press ctrl-­x to exit nano. The editor
prompts you to save your work (“Save modified buffer?”). This may seem
like an odd question, but don’t let the “buffer” term throw you off— nano is
just asking if you want to save the text you entered to the file. Press Y, then
hit enter to accept the suggested filename (cheese.txt).
     I often use nano since it works from a terminal, but you may prefer to
edit your text files using a graphical text editor. The Raspberry Pi OS desk-
top environment includes a handy text editor which you can launch from
RaspberryAccessoriesText Editor. At the time of this writing, this
opens an editor called Mousepad. Let’s try modifying cheese.txt further in
this text editor. First, we need to open the file by performing the following
within the text editor: FileOpenHomepizzacheese.txt Open
(button), as shown in Figure B-11.




Figure B-11: Opening cheese.txt in the text editor

     Once you have the file open in the text editor, you should see the text
you typed earlier. You can edit the text as you wish. Then save your changes
with FileSave.
     In addition to editing existing files, you can also use the text editor to
create new files. Just launch a new editor window (RaspberryAccessories
Text Editor) and click FileSave. This will prompt you to save your file in
the folder of your choice, with a name of your choosing. You can edit the
text of your new file and save your changes as needed by using FileSave
again. Or if you want to save an existing file with a new name, choose
FileSave As… instead.
     If you prefer to use nano to create a new file, from a terminal window
first change to the folder where you want to save your file (if needed), and
then type nano filename, as shown in this example:

$ nano new-­file.txt



                                                                     Resources   349
                    How Computers Really Work (Early Access) © 2021 by Matthew Justice

                        Type your text, and when you exit nano, you’ll be prompted to save this
                   new file.
                        We’ve just covered ways to view, edit, and create text files in Raspberry Pi
                   OS. If you want to remain in a terminal, nano is a good choice. If you prefer the
                   desktop, then the text editor Mousepad should meet your needs. There are
                   also other editors included with Raspberry Pi OS. Geany is a programmer’s
                   text editor, and Thonny Python IDE is tailored for Python programming.
                   Both are found under RaspberryProgramming. In this book’s projects, I’ll
                   leave it up to you to decide which text editor you use.
                        You may also wish to manage your files and folders in other ways—
                   move files around, delete files, and so forth. You can do all of this from
                   File Manager, or you can do it from a terminal window. Here are some
                   commands you can use from a bash prompt to get you started:
                       cd folder  Change the current directory (folder).
                       mkdir folder Make a directory.
                       rm file Delete a file.
                       rm -rf folder Delete a folder and its contents, including its subfolders.
                       mv file file2 Rename a file.
                       mv file folder/ Move a file from one location to another.
                       cp file folder/ Copy a file from one location to another.




350   Appendix B
