Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli




          SECURE DEVICE IDENTITY
                                   6
            For a long time, embedded systems ran
           anonymously in the shadows and didn’t
          care about remote access, digital business
       models, or sharing their data with other de-
vices and cloud services. However, these days, those
scenarios have changed fundamentally.
     Suddenly, maintenance staff are now logging into devices remotely and
can’t verify that they’re working with the correct device by looking at physi-
cal indicators. In addition, pay-per-use business models have become more
and more popular in industrial scenarios, and devices write their own bills.
Being able to prove the origin of usage data and mapping it to a specific cus-
tomer is essential in this case. Moreover, devices made by different manu-
facturers have started talking to one another and exchanging data. All these
trends have a strong requirement in common: every device needs a unique
identity, and every device must be able to prove it.
     The first part of this chapter investigates which properties contribute to
device uniqueness and can serve as a basis for identity as well as the closely
linked processes of identification and authentication. Next, we’ll look at how
the implementation of device identity management is regarded from two
angles: the on-device storage of a cryptographic identity and the life-cycle
management on the manufacturer’s side. The chapter concludes with two
case studies that explore identity generation and provisioning.
                   Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

      Every Device Is Unique
                   Mass production of consumer goods and industrial components might con-
                   vey the impression that all the products rolling off the line are identical,
                   right up to every bit in their firmware. However, if that were the case, how
                   would you be able to tell one device from another? Of course, products
                   have had stickers with serial numbers on them for a long time, but what
                   if a sticker falls off, is removed on purpose, or even replaced with a forged
                   version?
                         For modern devices, a unique identity should be an integral part of the
                   device itself, and the component should be able to actively prove its identity
                   to third-party devices, repair shops, and cloud services of the original manu-
                   facturer, just to name a few examples.
                         From a theoretical point of view, every single device—even with identi-
                   cal PCBs, microprocessors, and RAM—is clearly unique, because all these
                   units are subject to (if only small) individual differences in material, timely
                   behavior, power consumption, and so on. Academia is already working on
                   exploiting the uniqueness of these tiny physical features to establish device
                   identities. The corresponding research area is focused on physical unclonable
                   functions (PUFs), which have recently even found their way into the first com-
                   mercial products.
                         The following sections explore what might be available in current de-
                   vices that makes them unique from a practical point of view and how these
                   unique identities can be proven to other parties.


      Identification and Identifiers
                   Clearly, the term identification is closely related to the word identity. How-
                   ever, take a minute to think about its exact meaning.
                        If we want to define the process of identification, we could say it’s the
                   “claiming of a given identity.” For example, if you meet someone at a con-
                   ference, you could say, “Hi, my name is Joe!” You claim that you are Joe.
                   The same happens if your device collects some usage data—let’s say in the
                   course of one month—and then connects to your backend to provide the
                   data for customer billing. It will probably start with “Hi backend, my name
                   is XY1337-0815!” It claims to be a device with a certain “name.”


                   Unique Identifiers
                   Regarding uniqueness, telling somebody you’re Joe is clearly not enough.
                   Several Joes might exist, maybe even at the same conference. Adding your
                   last name might narrow it down, but your name still won’t be unique, at
                   least on a global scale. If you take place and date of birth into consideration,
                   you’ll be closer to having a set of data that uniquely identifies you. These
                   properties are called identifiers. Humans have many more of them: hair
                   color, eye color, size, weight, and so on.
                        Since devices usually don’t have human-like names, manufacturers have
                   to take another path for identification. For a long time, typical identifiers

102    Chapter 6
        Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

        have been vendor-chosen values like model type, serial number, and date of
        production.
             With the advent of the internet, the need for worldwide identifiers be-
        came clear. Back then, the concept of UUIDs, also known as globally unique
        identifiers (GUIDs), was proposed. It’s standardized in RFC 4122, among oth-
        ers, and is meant to provide 128-bit unique identifiers that don’t require a
        central registration process. Although the probability of identifier collision
        is not zero, it’s regarded as very close to zero in practice. The generation
        of UUIDs can, for example, be performed by the Linux RNG, as shown in
        Chapter 3.
             From a cryptographic point of view, public keys generated by asym-
        metric crypto algorithms like RSA and ECDSA also can perfectly serve as
        identifiers. They might even be combined with a subject name and further
        attributes to obtain a unique device certificate for identification as, for ex-
        ample, standardized in the network authentication standard IEEE 802.1AR.


        System Identities
        While some devices consist of a single central component that constitutes
        the whole device and its identity, other product architectures are more
        modular and allow for partial replacements in case of defects or hardware
        upgrades. Discussing which components contribute to the device’s iden-
        tity and which don’t is worthwhile for the latter cases. The physical parts of
        an embedded system provide a multitude of identifiers like media access
        control (MAC) addresses of network cards, Bluetooth chipsets, and Wi-Fi
        controllers, but also serial numbers and unique identifiers of CPUs, flash
        memories, and removable media.
             Requiring a set of identifiers to be part of the system identity also means
        that the system identity has to be regenerated or reapproved if one of those
        parts changes. This requirement can be an advantage for manufacturers—for
        example, to force users to purchase spare parts of the same brand—because
        every exchange requires the acknowledgment of the manufacturer. How-
        ever, system identities and forced manufacturer approval can also cause ad-
        ditional workload on the manufacturers’ side. Further, if every little change
        requires a feedback loop with the original manufacturer, it could signifi-
        cantly limit operators’ freedom to act in their daily business.

NOTE    Sometimes a device’s reliability is the utmost goal, and if its hardware breaks, it has
        to be immediately replaced by an operator. In such cases, allowing a device’s identity
        to be transferable is reasonable—for example, with a removable memory card.

Authentication and Authenticators
        In everyday language, identification and authentication are sometimes used
        synonymously, but authentication means much more than merely claiming
        an identity.
            If the validity and correctness of your identity are really important—for
        example, if you have to apply for a passport or register to vote—and you tell

                                                                          Secure Device Identity   103
                  Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                  them “Hi, I’m Joe,” they’ll probably reply, “Hi, Joe, please show me your ID
                  card.” They’ll make you prove your identity—the analog equivalent of a digi-
                  tal authentication process.
                       The term authentication means that you have to confirm the identity you
                  claimed during identification some seconds before. To do so, you need to
                  possess a valid authenticator corresponding to the given identity. For hu-
                  mans, authenticators can be ID cards, driver’s licenses, and so on. For all
                  these IDs, an authority at some point in time verified the human identity
                  and subsequently issued a corresponding authenticator that’s usually valid
                  for a certain amount of time. During this validity period, the authority and
                  others can use the provided authenticator to verify a specific identity.
                       For devices, typical authenticators are symmetric secret keys or asym-
                  metric private keys, (temporary) authentication tokens, or passwords (in
                  legacy cases). These authenticators were created and issued for a specific
                  device (for example, during production), and they can be used to prove
                  cryptographically the identity of that same device at a later time.


                  Authentication Protocols
                  Depending on the type of authenticator, the authentication process is
                  performed in different ways. A common approach is a challenge-response
                  authentication protocol. Figure 6-1 shows one form of a challenge-response
                  handshake.

                                  Verifier                                                 Device


                             Randomly choose
                  ¶
                               challenge C                   Send C

                                                                                   Process challenge C
                  ·                                                            with a device-specific secret
                                                            Return R
                                                                                to obtain the response R
                            Compare response R
                  ¸     with the expected value and
                        determine failure or success

                  Figure 6-1: The typical steps during challenge-response authentication

                       The challenge-response authentication process starts with the gener-
                  ation of a random challenge C ¶ on the verifier side that is subsequently
                  transmitted to the device. The device processes this unpredictable value
                  with its secret authenticator and yields a response R that’s returned to the
                  verifier ·. In the final step ¸, R is compared to its expected value to decide
                  whether authentication was successful.
                       For symmetric secrets, the on-device algorithm processing the given
                  challenge with the device-specific secret could be a hash function or an
                  HMAC construction. However, the disadvantage is that the secret also has
                  to be available in the verifier’s database to compute the correct expected
                  value and is not solely stored within the device.

104   Chapter 6
       Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

            In contrast, asymmetric cryptography allows for device-only authentica-
       tors that never leave the device, which is the most secure solution. Specifi-
       cally, digital signatures based on RSA or ECDSA, as explained in Chapter 2,
       could be used to generate authentication responses from random challenges.
       In this case, the verifier would need only the corresponding public key in or-
       der to check the validity of the returned signature.

NOTE   In most cases, authentication is possible only with secrets. Therefore, confidentiality
       is a natural protection goal for all kinds of authenticators. If broken, device imper-
       sonation becomes a likely threat.

       Dedicated Authentication Chips
       As introduced in Chapter 5, semiconductor manufacturers offer a variety
       of authentication chips that not only securely store authenticators but also
       provide an algorithmic means to perform a challenge-response handshake
       for authentication purposes.
            This approach has two advantages. First, extracting the secret authen-
       ticator from the chip is a pretty difficult task for attackers. Second, since
       these chips usually come with integrated support for asymmetric cryptogra-
       phy, mainly digital signatures based on elliptic curves, the secret never has
       to leave the physical boundaries of the chip.
            On the other hand, with this approach, you now have another compo-
       nent on your BOM, you need space on the PCB, and necessary software in-
       tegration efforts of these devices vary among vendors. In addition, an attack
       vector is often overlooked—namely, the physical transfer of such an identity
       chip to another device. The simple 8-pin packages could be desoldered and
       integrated into a different original device or even into a custom attacker de-
       vice. As in code-lifting attacks, adversaries might not care about the secret
       inside the chip if they can move the whole chip to their desired location.


       Multifactor Authentication
       For the authentication of human users, multifactor authentication (MFA) has
       gained a lot of attention over the last several years. Following the principle
       of defense in depth, MFA requires attackers to capture not only one authen-
       ticator, such as a password, but also at least a second factor, like a temporary
       token generated in a mobile app or by a hardware token. Since passwords
       are stored in human brains (or password managers) and additional authen-
       ticators often originate from an additional hardware device or at least a dif-
       ferent communication channel, the necessary effort for successful attacks is
       significantly higher.
            For device authentication, the situation is a little bit different because
       devices don’t use brains and mobile apps for authenticator storage and gen-
       eration. However, you could still consider a multifactor approach—for ex-
       ample, using one authenticator stored in firmware and a second one that
       originates from a dedicated authentication chip. The authentication process
       would then consist of two handshakes, one with the hardware component

                                                                          Secure Device Identity   105
                  Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                  and one based on the device software, forcing attackers to compromise two
                  different parts of your device if they want to get hold of its identity.
                       Besides additional explicit authenticators, you can use implicit, environ-
                  mental parameters to strengthen device authentication. A common example
                  is geographical limitations, also known as geo-fencing. In that scenario, device
                  authentication (or general operation) succeeds only if the device’s location
                  matches a predefined area. One way to determine this parameter is the pub-
                  lic IP address the device uses for internet communication. Of course, the
                  security gain by these implicit authentication properties is maximized if an
                  attacker who has compromised a device can’t forge the parameters. They
                  should be observable from the outside and not just claimed by the device
                  itself.


                  Trusted Third Parties
                  In the past, the main verifier of a device’s identity was the manufacturer of
                  the same device. Proprietary (and eventually insecure) authentication pro-
                  cesses did their job. However, in a multilateral digital ecosystem in IoT and
                  IIoT scenarios, the need for cross-manufacturer device authentication be-
                  comes obvious.
                      This requirement means manufacturers have to trust authenticators of
                  other devices, including competitors. Since one-to-one trust relations be-
                  tween manufacturers would lead to enormous management overhead, the
                  concept of a trusted third party (TTP) is necessary, as shown in Figure 6-2.

                                                      Trusted third party
                                                                               Va
                                        ¶




                                                                                lid
                                                 ·
                                      n




                                                                                    ity
                                    io


                                               e
                                               t
                                            ca
                                   at




                                                                                      ch
                                str


                                          tifi




                                                                                          ec
                               gi


                                           r




                                                                                             k
                                        Ce
                              Re




                                                                                            º




                                                     Authentication request ¸

                  Device manufacturer                Certificate and proof ¹                Verifying party

                  Figure 6-2: The role of a trusted third party in device authentication

                       In this approach, manufacturers register their device identities with the
                  TTP ¶. After verification, the TTP certifies the given identity and returns a
                  device-specific certificate ·. Upon an authentication request in the field ¸,
                  the device can provide the issued certificate and cryptographically prove
                  that it is in possession of the corresponding authenticators ¹. However, at
                  this point, the verifying party can’t be sure that the given cryptographic data
                  corresponds to the actual device identity. The verifier finally has to check
                  the validity of the authentication º, either in direct communication with


106   Chapter 6
        Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

        the TTP or by using data like public keys provided by the TTP. Afterward, a
        reliable trust relation with a previously unknown device can be established.


        Certificates and Certificate Authorities
        I’ve been using the term certificate to describe a digital document that’s is-
        sued by a TTP to confirm a device’s identity. Technically speaking, the most
        common implementations of this concept are X.509 v3 certificates based on
        asymmetric cryptography as specified in RFC 5280.
             The purpose of these certificates is to bind a given public key to its cor-
        responding subject, such as a device, and to a set of attributes including a
        validity period and a certificate serial number. A certificate authority (CA) dig-
        itally signs these values with its own private key. This CA is also included
        in the certificate, in the Issuer field. The result is the smallest version of a
        certificate chain, which means that a device certificate and its public key can
        be cryptographically verified, and if successful, the next certificate (namely,
        that of the CA) has to be verified. Authentication is trusted only if both veri-
        fications succeed.
             In practice, a manufacturer might have its own product CA, which is
        certified by an intermediate CA of a TTP, which is again certified by an in-
        ternationally recognized root CA. With that process, the rather complex
        hierarchical certificate chains are established that have to be verified up to
        their root, whenever a device needs to authenticate itself.
             The root certificates aren’t certified by anybody; they’re self-signed and
        have to be available in some kind of root store on the verifier’s side. This
        means that verifying parties also must unconditionally trust all their root
        certificates. Therefore, the root store requires strong integrity protection;
        otherwise, attackers can inject new trust relations by manipulating the stored
        certificates.
             In several cases, a certificate can’t be trusted until its actual end of
        validity—for example, because of a private-key compromise, device theft,
        or similar issue. For such situations, CAs maintain a certificate revocation list
        (CRL) that lists all certificates no longer trusted even though their valid-
        ity period is not yet over. The Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) is a
        common protocol for checking the revocation status of a certificate during
        authentication, as standardized in RFC 6960.
             The whole architecture of verification, certification, and revocation, and
        the corresponding processes and services, are often referred to as the public-
        key infrastructure (PKI). Since such a system demands significant maintenance
        and documentation efforts, small and medium-sized companies often hes-
        itate to implement it themselves and rely on PKI service providers instead,
        which means TTPs.


Identity Life Cycle and Management
        Now that we’ve covered the basic concepts of device authentication, this sec-
        tion establishes the need for reliable strategies for managing the life cycle of


                                                                         Secure Device Identity   107
                   Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                   device identities. Life-cycle management has four main steps, as depicted in
                   Figure 6-3: identity generation, its provisioning in manufacturer systems as
                   well as within the device, everyday usage in the field, and the often-forgotten
                   exchange or destruction of the same identity.


                                           Generation



                      Exchange
                          or                                    Provisioning
                      destruction


                                            Usage in
                                            the field

                   Figure 6-3: The life cycle of device identities

WARNING            Don’t treat life-cycle management as optional. Even if you’ve solved all the technical
                   challenges regarding identifiers, cryptography, and secure memory, make sure your
                   organization has answers regarding the organizational challenges ahead.

                   Generation
                   A device’s identity can be generated in various places and at various times.
                   The place and time you choose affect the security requirements and proce-
                   dures of your production process. If you use electronics manufacturing ser-
                   vices (EMS) to manufacture your product, a trustful and close cooperation
                   with your service provider is essential.
                        Generating the identity on the device itself during production can be
                   the most secure option of all, but only if the corresponding authentication
                   secrets never leave the device. Asymmetric cryptography enables this use
                   case because the generated private key might stay on the device, and its pub-
                   lic counterpart can be made available to potential verifiers. Of course, you
                   might also generate a symmetric secret on the device during the production
                   process, but in that case, the key has to be exported later to enable identity
                   verification.
                        While on-device generation has security advantages, it comes with op-
                   erational and practical challenges. Imagine that a device “loses” its identity
                   because the memory that stores it gets broken. If that was the single storage
                   location, a new identity has to be generated after repair, which might lead to
                   a conflict because a new entry is generated in your product database, but the
                   hardware is actually old. Also, your customers would have to replace the old
                   device identity with the new one in their asset management systems. If you
                   as a manufacturer have an identity backup, this case could be handled easily,
                   but at the cost of security.
                        A second disadvantage of on-device generation can be the late availabil-
                   ity of product identities, because they are available only after a certain manu-
                   facturing step is completed. Sometimes that might be exactly what you want,

 108   Chapter 6
          Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

          but if your device identities have to be populated in your own IT systems to
          enable smooth operation from day one, you might want to prepare those
          processes with your device identities even before actual production.

WARNING   On-device identity generation based on RSA keys is a nondeterministic process and
          takes a variable amount of time. This limitation has to be considered when planning
          production processes, especially for low-performance devices.
               Generating an identity outside the device provides more flexibility in
          managing the device identity before production and in cases of repair. Au-
          thentication secrets are prepared in advance within an identity management
          system and provided to production in a second step. However, this means
          that these identities exist before the real device is even assembled and, of
          course, they already carry the protection goals of confidentiality and in-
          tegrity. Information disclosure or data manipulation before production
          could have severe consequences for the security of your product.
               A last point that might influence your on-/off-device generation deci-
          sion is the involvement of a TTP. If you generate identities during produc-
          tion, they have to be registered, verified, and certified with a third party
          within a tight schedule. Of course, that’s possible and desirable, and it’s
          already implemented by leaders in this field, but it requires a significant
          amount of infrastructure and process management efforts.


          Provisioning
          Depending on the identity generation phase, the following provisioning step
          comes in two flavors with their own pros and cons. In both cases, the end re-
          sult should be that the identity is provisioned on the device itself and within
          the product-tracking and identity management system of the manufacturer
          and the eventually involved EMS provider.
               After on-device generation, all manufacturer systems have to be provi-
          sioned with the new identity, which requires a read-out step during pro-
          duction. For asymmetric crypto, only the public key or a corresponding
          certificate from a TTP has to be stored in the manufacturer’s identity data-
          base. However, if backups of authentication secrets are desired, you can
          create them by extracting the private key at this point.
               The offline generation of identities requires information flow in the
          other direction—namely, from an identity management system to the de-
          vice to be produced. Clearly, a programming step is necessary, in which
          the secret and the attributes of the pregenerated identity are written to spe-
          cific memory locations or hardware resources within the product. This step
          might be integrated in existing firmware programming procedures or simi-
          lar processes.
               In all these cases, when sensitive data is transferred to or from a device
          during provisioning, at least the integrity and often also the confidentiality
          of this communication should be guaranteed. Otherwise, authentication se-
          crets might be disclosed, devices might end up with a manipulated identity,
          or the manufacturer’s identity data might be corrupted.

                                                                           Secure Device Identity   109
                  Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

      NOTE        If your device identities are generated before production and are then sent to your
                  EMS provider by email or on a USB stick by snail mail, consider carefully whether
                  this meets your protection goals. If you’re honest, it probably doesn’t.

                  Usage in the Field
                  The previously generated and provisioned identities are used for authentica-
                  tion in the field. So far, so good. Can we take any other precautions during
                  everyday usage? Absolutely. An identity management system allows us to
                  perform sanity and plausibility checks whenever devices authenticate with
                  our systems.
                      Imagine your authentication logs show that the same device connects
                  from two locations within a short time. This might be an indicator that
                  somebody has stolen a device’s identity and is using it for their own pur-
                  poses. If such cases can be identified early and specific investigations fol-
                  low in a timely manner, damage can be significantly limited.


                  Exchange or Destruction
                  Even if some devices (especially in industrial, military, or space applications)
                  are meant to last forever physically, their authentication secrets usually don’t.
                  On the internet, a common validity period for web server certificates is 90
                  days (as, for example, implemented by Let’s Encrypt at https://letsencrypt.org),
                  which means that these identities have to be regenerated at least every three
                  months.
                       Clearly, identity renewal in IoT and IIoT scenarios is still far away from
                  such high frequencies. However, at least if X.509 certificates are used for au-
                  thentication purposes, a validity period is a mandatory parameter that has
                  to be specified, either by your company or by the TTP of your choice. Some
                  manufacturers issue device certificates with a validity period of 20 years or
                  more, but even if the chosen crypto is future-proof, it’s hard to estimate
                  whether such an identity will still be trustworthy after 15 years or more.
                       Some network products (for example, those from Cisco) support cer-
                  tificate management protocols like the Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol
                  (SCEP) or its more recent alternative, Enrollment over Secure Transport (EST).
                  Since this is new ground for IoT and IIoT devices, no common standard has
                  been established as of this writing, but it’s pretty clear that automation is key
                  to continuous and reliable identity and certificate management.

      NOTE        In 2022, manufacturers of security gateways for accessing the German health telem-
                  atics infrastructure claimed that devices had to be physically replaced because the
                  validity of their five-year cryptographic identities came to an end. Subsequently, the
                  Chaos Computer Club (CCC) proved the opposite and, by its own account, saved the
                  German healthcare system e400 million. This is just one example that emphasizes
                  the importance of robust identity-renewal processes.




110   Chapter 6
        Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

             The final step of an identity’s life cycle is literally its destruction. While
        physical removal is not always possible, a manufacturer should at least be
        prepared to revoke the trust relation for a specific device if it reaches its end
        of life before the defined end of its validity period. A typical measure for
        this purpose is a CRL maintained by a CA or a trust status flag in your own
        manufacturer database.


Case Study: Identity Generation and Provisioning
        In this case study, I investigate the availability of identifiers for an STM32-
        MP157F-DK2 and how to extract them in order to derive a system identity.
        Further, we’ll see how to prepare a certificate signing request on this device
        that can subsequently be provided to a TTP, which in turn, is able to issue a
        valid device certificate.


        Identifiers and System Identity
        The STM32MP157F-DK2 evaluation kit is an embedded system that consists
        of several components. Many of these components come with their own
        identifiers that engineers might capture and use to create a comprehensive
        device identity.
             A common identifier is the serial number of a device’s main CPU. In
        this regard, ST’s Reference Manual RM0436 for STM32MP157F devices states:
        “The 96-bit unique device identifier provides a reference number, unique for
        a given device and in any context. These bits cannot be altered by the user.”
        This unique ID (UID) is immutably stored in the OTP memory of the STM32-
        MP157F chip. Listing 6-1 shows that this UID is split into three 32-bit words
        that can be read from specific memory addresses.

        Base address: 0x5C00 5000 (BSEC base address on APB5)
        Address offset: 0x234 = UID[31:0]
        Address offset: 0x238 = UID[63:32]
        Address offset: 0x23C = UID[95:64]

        Listing 6-1: The physical addresses of the UID in STM32MP157F devices

            We can use the devmem2 command line tool to read physical memory ad-
        dresses. As shown in Listing 6-2, the application outputs three 32-bit words
        representing the chip’s identity, given a combination of base address and
        UID offsets.

        # devmem2 0x5c005234
        ...
        Read at address 0x5C005234 (0xb6fb0234): 0x0038003D
        # devmem2 0x5c005238
        ...
        Read at address 0x5C005238 (0xb6fb9238): 0x34385114




                                                                         Secure Device Identity   111
                  Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                  # devmem2 0x5c00523c
                  ...
                  Read at address 0x5C00523C (0xb6f1423c): 0x36383238

                  Listing 6-2: Reading the CPU UID of my STM32MP157F device from physical addresses

                       On Linux systems, the serial number is also available from /proc/cpuinfo.
                  The output shown in Listing 6-3 confirms that the serial number is the same
                  as that extracted from the raw memory locations before.

                  # cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep Serial
                  Serial : 0038003D3438511436383238

                  Listing 6-3: Capturing the CPU serial number available in Linux

                       However, the STM32MP157F chip is not the only one on the PCB. ST’s
                  User Manual UM2637 describes a multitude of implemented communica-
                  tion interfaces. Besides classic Ethernet networking, the device includes
                  an IC that provides Wi-Fi and Bluetooth capabilities. All these interfaces
                  have unique MAC addresses that might be used to derive system identities.
                  Listing 6-4 shows how to extract those values when running on Linux.

                  # cat /sys/class/net/eth0/address
                  10:e7:7a:e1:81:65
                  # cat /sys/class/net/wlan0/address
                  48:eb:62:c4:0a:08
                  # cat /sys/kernel/debug/bluetooth/hci0/identity
                  43:43:a1:12:1f:ac (type 0) 00000000000000000000000000000000 00:00:00:00:00:00

                  Listing 6-4: Extracting Ethernet, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth MAC addresses in Linux

                       Finally, one part of the system can be removed and replaced easily: the
                  removable media card. In my case, it’s a microSD card that contains a card
                  identification (CID). This 128-bit value uniquely identifies an SD card. Among
                  other information, it contains a manufacturer ID, a product serial number,
                  and the date of production. Again, Linux provides a corresponding entry in
                  its sysfs that can be read out as illustrated in Listing 6-5.

                  # cat /sys/block/mmcblk0/device/cid
                  275048534431364760dad3df9a013780
                  # cat /sys/block/mmcblk0/device/serial
                  0xdad3df9a

                  Listing 6-5: Reading the unique CID of an SD card

                      Besides the cid value, Linux provides the serial value for an SD card,
                  which solely contains the memory card’s serial number.
                      For this case study, let’s assume your team has chosen to use the central
                  CPU ID and the Wi-Fi MAC address as the two relevant system identifiers.
                  They can be combined by a hash function, as shown in the next section.



112   Chapter 6
   Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

  Certificate Signing Request
  A certificate signing request (CSR) is a data structure that requests a CA to cer-
  tify that a given public key is bound to a specific identity, a device identity
  in this case. Linux offers several ways to generate a CSR and provide the
  necessary information. Listing 6-6 shows the imports necessary to accom-
  plish RSA key generation and CSR creation with the help of the cryptography
  Python module. Also, the subprocess module is included to get system identi-
  fiers by using the available command line tools.

  import subprocess
  from cryptography.hazmat.primitives import serialization
  from cryptography.hazmat.primitives.asymmetric import rsa
  from cryptography import x509
  from cryptography.x509.oid import NameOID
  from cryptography.hazmat.primitives import hashes

  Listing 6-6: The necessary imports from the cryptography and subprocess modules

      The first part of the on-device identity generation is usually based on
  asymmetric cryptography (RSA, in this case). As shown in Listing 6-7, a ran-
  dom key pair can be created with a single line.

  # Generate RSA key
  key = rsa.generate_private_key(public_exponent=65537, key_size=4096 ¶)

  # Write key to disk
  with open('dev.key', 'wb') as f:
      f.write(key.private_bytes(
          encoding=serialization.Encoding.PEM,
          format=serialization.PrivateFormat.TraditionalOpenSSL,
          encryption_algorithm=
          serialization.BestAvailableEncryption(· b'PrivateKeyPassphrase'),
      ))

  Listing 6-7: An on-device generation of an RSA key pair

      For this case study, I decided to use an RSA key length of 4,096 bits ¶
  to account for an (I)IoT device’s lifetime of several years. To simplify this ex-
  ample, the generated private key is stored in the dev.key file and is protected
  by a standard passphrase ·. In an actual production environment, the key
  should be stored in a secure way, as discussed in Chapter 5.
      Listing 6-8 shows an example procedure of identifier collection and
  processing.

  # Collect system data
¶ output = subprocess.Popen('cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep Serial',
           shell=True, stdout=subprocess.PIPE)
  cpu_serial = output.stdout.read().split()[2]




                                                                    Secure Device Identity   113
                     Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                  · output = subprocess.Popen('cat /sys/class/net/wlan0/address',
                             shell=True, stdout=subprocess.PIPE)
                    wifi_mac = output.stdout.read().split()[0]

                    # Hash collected system data
                  ¸ digest = hashes.Hash(hashes.SHA256())
                    digest.update(cpu_serial)
                    digest.update(wifi_mac)
                    system_id = digest.finalize()
                  ¹ system_id = system_id[:4].hex()
                    Listing 6-8: Collection and processing of an on-device identifier

                         In the first step, the CPU serial number ¶ and the Wi-Fi MAC address ·
                    of the produced system are read by the means Linux provides. Subsequently,
                    the hash function SHA-256 ¸ is used to process those values and to derive a
                    4-byte system identifier ¹ that would change if the CPU or the Wi-Fi chip is
                    replaced in the future. The SD card ID is neglected on purpose, because SD
                    cards break every now and then, which would lead to an unnecessarily high
                    demand for identity regeneration.
                         For a device certificate and a CSR, respectively, you need to specify a
                    common name for the device, as shown in Listing 6-9.

                    # Manufacturer data
                    manufacturer = 'IoT Devices Corp'
                    manufacturer_device_serial_no = 'IOTDEV-1337-08151234'

                    # System name for CSR and certificate
                  ¶ cert_common_name = manufacturer_device_serial_no + '-' + system_id

                    # Generate CSR and sign with private key
                    csr = x509.CertificateSigningRequestBuilder().subject_name(x509.Name([
                        x509.NameAttribute(NameOID.ORGANIZATION_NAME, manufacturer),
                     · x509.NameAttribute(NameOID.COMMON_NAME, cert_common_name),
                  ¸ ])).sign(key, hashes.SHA256())

                    # Write CSR to disk
                    with open('dev.csr', 'wb') as f:
                        f.write(csr.public_bytes(serialization.Encoding.PEM))

                    Listing 6-9: An on-device CSR preparation

                         In this case study, the unique device name is the combination of the
                    serial number given by the manufacturer and the hardware-dependent sys-
                    tem identifier ¶. This string is used as an input to the CSR generation ·,
                    together with the manufacturer’s name in the CSR’s organization field. Fi-
                    nally, the device signs the CSR with its unique confidential private key ¸.
                    Afterward, the CSR is stored in the dev.csr file.
                         The saved CSR file has to be transmitted to the CA responsible for cer-
                    tifying the identity of produced devices. Also, the manufacturer or EMS

114   Chapter 6
Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

provider might extract the collected and generated device data in a database.
As an example, Listing 6-10 shows the data from an STM32MP157F device.

Collected CPU serial number:    0038003D3438511436383238
Collected Wi-Fi MAC address:    48:eb:62:c4:0a:08
Derived system identifier:      f30cf858
Given device serial number:     IOTDEV-1337-08151234
Common name in certificate:     IOTDEV-1337-08151234-f30cf858

Listing 6-10: Example output of identifier data from my STM32MP157F device

     As you can see, a 4-byte system identifier is generated from the listed
individual identifiers and appended to the device serial number. This string
is subsequently used as the common name for the generated CSR.


Certificate Authority
Before we issue the final certificate, let’s look at what the CSR contains.
Listing 6-11 shows how to display CSR contents with the openssl req com-
mand line tool.

$ openssl req -in dev.csr -noout -text
Certificate Request:
    Data:
        Version: 1 (0x0)
     ¶ Subject: O = IoT Devices Corp, CN = IOTDEV-1337-08151234-f30cf858
     · Subject Public Key Info:
            Public Key Algorithm: rsaEncryption
                Public-Key: (4096 bit)
                Modulus:
                     00:d3:a0:14:fb:e1:0e:d0:74:3d:26:d4:ef:a1:ed:
                     ...
                     c9:2a:f5:46:e4:b2:ad:a9:5e:ee:cb:79:85:d9:1e:
                     9f:3e:57
                Exponent: 65537 (0x10001)
        Attributes:
            (none)
            Requested Extensions:
    Signature Algorithm: sha256WithRSAEncryption
 ¸ Signature Value:
        81:98:b1:e8:c2:fe:3a:55:32:39:2e:27:ce:2c:a8:54:bd:04:
        ...
        17:77:6c:a1:5b:4a:a7:ed:22:55:33:23:26:55:05:90:26:d2:
        90:7a:5e:34:65:80:32:4e

Listing 6-11: Example CSR for my specific STM32MP157F device

   The subject ¶ is represented by an organization string (O) and a com-
mon name (CN) as specified in our CSR preparation script in Listing 6-9,


                                                                 Secure Device Identity   115
                  Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                  followed by its corresponding RSA public key ·. The device’s digital signa-
                  ture ¸ can be clearly identified at the end of the given request. The CA can
                  use it to verify whether the requesting subject actually has access to the pri-
                  vate key corresponding to the given public key in the CSR.
                       CA and PKI infrastructures usually consist of complex processes with a
                  variety of organizational and technical measures to ensure proper and trust-
                  worthy functioning. As shown in Listing 6-12, we create a test CA that’s far
                  from production-ready but okay for educational purposes. The term quick
                  and dirty might be applicable here.

                  $ openssl genrsa -out ca.key 4096
                  $ openssl req -new -x509 -key ca.key \
                                -subj "/C=DE/L=Augsburg/O=Super Trusted Party/CN=CA 123" \
                                -out ca.crt

                  Listing 6-12: A quick generation of a test CA with openssl tools

                       We can generate the test CA with the help of the openssl genrsa tool.
                  The first command in Listing 6-12 generates a 4,096-bit RSA key pair for the
                  CA and stores it as ca.key. Since, in this case study, this is the root of the CA,
                  the corresponding certificate has to be self-signed. The ca.crt certificate can
                  be obtained by using the openssl req tool and telling it the CA’s attributes—
                  for example, the country (DE for Germany) and city it’s located in (Augsburg),
                  its organization’s name (Super Trusted Party), and its common name (CA 123).
                       After the CA has registered and successfully verified the certificate re-
                  quest at hand, it takes the CSR data and adds attributes like the validity pe-
                  riod. In Listing 6-13, you can see that the -days parameter is set to 3650, which
                  means that the issued certificate is valid for 10 years.

                  $ openssl x509 -req -in dev.csr -CA ca.crt -CAkey ca.key -CAcreateserial \
                                 -days 3650 -out dev.crt

                  Listing 6-13: Generating a certificate from a CSR with the openssl tool

                      In the device certificate generation process, the CA decides on the
                  length of the validity period, but of course that has an influence on your
                  device identity life cycle. Make sure to choose this value deliberately.
                      Let’s look at the final result of this demanding process. The openssl x509
                  tool is able to output the device certificate contents, as shown in Listing 6-14.

                  $ openssl x509 -in dev.crt -noout -text
                  Certificate:
                      Data:
                          Version: 1 (0x0)
                          Serial Number:
                            ¶ 45:3c:c3:30:c1:e3:c2:a9:49:5c:14:d6:16:5d:79:69:24:6c:31:66
                          Signature Algorithm: sha256WithRSAEncryption
                       · Issuer: C = DE, L = Augsburg, O = Super Trusted Party, CN = CA 123
                          Validity
                               Not Before: Apr 5 11:18:13 2024 GMT


116   Chapter 6
        Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                ¸ Not After : Apr 2 11:18:13 2034 GMT
               Subject: O = IoT Devices Corp, CN = IOTDEV-1337-08151234-f30cf858
               Subject Public Key Info:
                    Public Key Algorithm: rsaEncryption
                        RSA Public-Key: (4096 bit)
                        Modulus:
                            00:d3:a0:14:fb:e1:0e:d0:74:3d:26:d4:ef:a1:ed:
                            ...
                            c9:2a:f5:46:e4:b2:ad:a9:5e:ee:cb:79:85:d9:1e:
                            9f:3e:57
                        Exponent: 65537 (0x10001)
           Signature Algorithm: sha256WithRSAEncryption
         ¹ Signature Value:
                75:d5:07:71:ec:fe:c6:27:fd:e2:a7:1c:fa:b9:89:b3:9c:0f:
                ...
                8d:fa:f6:f1:53:79:32:1e:a8:ec:6f:f7:03:57:2f:7b:f4:fb:
                45:77:6a:f8:c6:70:72:41

        Listing 6-14: The certificate contents of a sample device
             In comparison to the original CSR, you can see that the CA added a cer-
        tificate serial number ¶ and its own data at the Issuer field ·. The validity
        period ¸ is set to be 10 years from the moment of issuance. And, finally, all
        these attributes are signed by the CA ¹ together with the device’s informa-
        tion and its public key. Now every entity that trusts the used CA is able to
        authenticate the produced device.
             After issuing the certificate, it has to be provided to the device itself,
        but also to the manufacturer’s identity management system. During produc-
        tion, this whole process of generation, certificate issuance, and provisioning
        should run with a high degree of automation and with precautions taken to
        minimize threats to confidentiality and integrity.


Case Study: RSA Key Generation in Production
        Although ECDSA has some advantages over RSA, as discussed in Chapter 2,
        it’s still widely used in certificates. However, if you work with RSA, be aware
        that RSA key generation is a nondeterministic process and might take vary-
        ing amounts of time.
              This second, brief case study investigates how much time is required
        during the production process to generate RSA keys of a given length.
        Listing 6-15 shows a simple way to analyze RSA key-generation times.

        import time
        from cryptography.hazmat.primitives.asymmetric import rsa

        time_data = []
        for n in range(16):
            start_time   = time.time()
            key = rsa.generate_private_key(public_exponent=65537, key_size=4096)

                                                                         Secure Device Identity   117
                  Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

                      elapsed_time = time.time() - start_time
                      print('Try', n, ': RSA 4096-bit key generation took',
                            '{:.3f}'.format(elapsed_time), 'seconds!')
                      time_data.append(elapsed_time)
                  print('MIN:', '{:.3f}'.format(min(time_data)), 'seconds')
                  print('MAX:', '{:.3f}'.format(max(time_data)), 'seconds')
                  print('AVG:', '{:.3f}'.format(sum(time_data)/len(time_data)), 'seconds')

                  Listing 6-15: An RSA key-generation timing analysis
                       This example uses the cryptography Python module and the parameters
                  from the previous case study. It performs 16 tries for simplicity, but a sound
                  statistical analysis would require a larger number of test runs. Listing 6-16
                  shows exemplary results of RSA 4,096-bit key-generation times obtained by
                  running the code from Listing 6-15 on my STM32MP157F device.

                  # python3 rsa_key_gen_time.py
                  Try 0 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 59.920 seconds!
                  Try 1 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 28.696 seconds!
                  Try 2 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 72.872 seconds!
                  Try 3 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 109.765 seconds!
                  ...
                  Try 12 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 48.925 seconds!
                  Try 13 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 50.885 seconds!
                  Try 14 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 90.907 seconds!
                  Try 15 : RSA 4096-bit key generation took 40.634 seconds!
                  MIN: 28.696 seconds
                  MAX: 109.765 seconds
                  AVG: 62.768 seconds

                  Listing 6-16: RSA key-generation timing results on my STM32MP157F device
                      The variation of generation times is not negligible. The RSA key gener-
                  ation may finish within 30 seconds but might also take 110 seconds or even
                  more. This variation has to be considered in production scheduling, and
                  since an upper bound doesn’t exist for the generation time, you have to ex-
                  pect outliers that might take significantly longer.


      Summary
                  There’s no doubt that every single device is a physically unique object. With
                  the help of identifiers like CPU serial numbers, MAC addresses, and values
                  chosen by the manufacturer, we’re able to represent this uniqueness in the
                  digital space and provide a base for device identities.
                      However, merely claiming an identity isn’t enough for most applications.
                  Devices have to be able to cryptographically prove their identity with the
                  help of unique and confidential authenticators like cryptographic keys. This
                  process is called authentication. The secure storage of those authentication
                  secrets is essential to prevent impersonation attacks. Chapter 5 provided
                  some ideas for confidential data storage in hardware or software.

118   Chapter 6
Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli

     A common concept to establish trust in device identities is the registra-
tion of devices at third parties that verify their identities and issue digital
device certificates. These can be used by anybody trusting the issuer to au-
thenticate a device.
     Besides the technical challenges of binding a digital identity to a device,
a much broader field of organizational processes have to be specified to pro-
vide secure and reliable identity life-cycle management. These processes of-
ten involve EMS providers, TTPs, and your custom process specifics, which
leads to a complexity that should never be underestimated.
     The more you dive into this topic, the more “interesting” problems you
will discover. For several years, researchers have been working on PUF im-
plementations to exploit manufacturing process variations in order to derive
implicit chip identities, and the first products on the market already contain
such circuits. Further, identity management automation in on- and offline
scenarios and corresponding protocols like SCEP and EST will certainly gain
more attention in the future, providing a major step forward for managing
secure device identities.




                                                                 Secure Device Identity   119
Engineering Secure Devices (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Dominik Merli
