                                                                                                                                                                                         DE
                                                                                                                                                                                       CO

                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    EAT

                                                                                                                                                                                              EEP
                                                                                                                                                                                            SL




                                                                                   CO            EAT

                                                                                           EEP

   REWIRE                                                                                SL




 YOUR BRAIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   THINK LIKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A PROGR AMMER




                                                                                                                                                                                      THINK LIKE A PROGR AMMER
The real challenge of programming isn’t learning a                                                     • Master more advanced programming tools like recursion
language’s syntax—it’s learning to creatively solve                                                      and dynamic memory                                                                                            A N   I N T R O D U C T I O N   T O
problems so you can build something great.
                                                                                                       • Organize your thoughts and develop strategies to tackle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CREATIVE PROBLEM SOLVING
In this one-of-a-kind text, author V. Anton Spraul breaks                                                particular types of problems
down the ways that programmers solve problems and
                                                                                                       Although the book’s examples are written in C++, the
teaches you what other introductory books often ignore:
                                                                                                       creative problem-solving concepts they illustrate go beyond                                                           V. ANTON SPRAUL
how to Think Like a Programmer. Each chapter tackles
                                                                                                       any particular language; in fact, they often reach outside the
a single programming concept, like classes, pointers,
                                                                                                       realm of computer science. As the most skillful programmers
and recursion, and open-ended exercises throughout
                                                                                                       know, writing great code is a creative art—and the first
challenge you to apply your knowledge.
                                                                                                       step in creating your masterpiece is learning to Think Like
You’ll also learn how to:                                                                              a Programmer.

• Split problems into discrete components to make
  them easier to solve                                                                                                 ABOUT THE AUTHOR

• Make the most of code reuse with functions, classes,                                                 V. Anton Spraul has taught introductory programming and
  and libraries                                                                                        computer science for more than 15 years. This book is a

• Pick the perfect data structure for a particular job
                                                                                                       distillation of the techniques he has used and honed over
                                                                                                       many one-on-one sessions with struggling programmers.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DE
                                                                                                       He is also the author of Computer Science Made Simple.                                                           CO             EAT

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EEP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SL




               T H E F I N E ST I N G E E K E N T E RTA I N M E N T ™
               w w w.nostarch.com




                         “ I L I E F L AT .”                                                                                            $34.95 ($36.95 CDN)
               This book uses RepKover — a durable binding that won’t snap shut.



                                                                                                                                                                SHELVE IN:




                                                                                                                                                                PROGRAMMING/GENERAL
                        SOLVING PROBLEMS
                         WITH RECURSION



 DE
CO           EAT


     SL
       EEP
                      This chapter is about recursion, which is when
                     a function directly or indirectly calls itself.
                    Recursive programming looks as if it should
                  be simple. Indeed, a good recursive solution
         often has a simple, almost elegant appearance. How-
         ever, very often the route to that solution is anything
         but simple. This is because recursion requires us to think differently than
         we do with other types of programming. When we process data using loops,
         we’re thinking about processing in a sequential manner, but when we pro-
         cess data using recursion, our normal sequential thinking process won’t
         help. Many good, fledgling programmers struggle with recursion because
         they can’t see a way to apply the problem-solving skills they’ve learned to
         recursive problems. In this chapter, we’ll discuss how to attack recursive prob-
         lems systematically. The answer is using what we will call the Big Recursive Idea,
         henceforth referred to as the BRI. It’s an idea that’s so straightforward it will
         seem like a trick, but it works.




                              Think Like a Programmer
                               ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
      Review of Recursion Fundamentals
                   There is not much to know about the syntax of recursion; the difficulty arises
                   when you try to use recursion to solve problems. Recursion occurs any time a
                   function calls itself, so the syntax of recursion is just the syntax of a function
                   call. The most common form is direct recursion, when a call to a function occurs
                   in the body of that same function. For example:

                   int factorial(int n) {
                     if (n == 1) return 1;
                      else return n * factorial(n - 1);
                   }

                        This function, which is a common but highly inefficient demonstration
                   of recursion, computes the factorial of n. For example, if n is 5, then the fac-
                   torial is the product of all the numbers from 5 to 1, or 120. Note that in some
                   cases no recursion occurs. In this function, if the parameter is 1, we simply
                   return a value directly without any recursion , which is known as a base case.
                   Otherwise, we make the recursive call .
                        The other form of recursion is indirect recursion—for example, if function
                   A calls function B, which later calls function A. Indirect recursion is rarely
                   used as a problem-solving technique, so we won’t cover it here.

      Head and Tail Recursion
                   Before we discuss the BRI, we need to understand the difference between
                   head recursion and tail recursion. In head recursion, the recursive call, when it
                   happens, comes before other processing in the function (think of it happen-
                   ing at the top, or head, of the function). In tail recursion, it’s the opposite—
                   the processing occurs before the recursive call. Choosing between the two
                   recursive styles may seem arbitrary, but the choice can make all the differ-
                   ence. To illustrate this difference, let’s look at two problems.


                                      PROBLEM: HOW MANY PARROTS?
                   Passengers on the Tropical Paradise Railway (TPR) look forward to seeing dozens of
                   colorful parrots from the train windows. Because of this, the railway takes a keen interest
                   in the health of the local parrot population and decides to take a tally of the number of
                   parrots in view of each train platform along the main line. Each platform is staffed by a
                   TPR employee (see Figure 6-1), who is certainly capable of counting parrots. Unfortu-
                   nately, the job is complicated by the primitive telephone system. Each platform can call
                   only its immediate neighbors. How do we get the parrot total at the main line terminal?




144    Chapter 6                           Think Like a Programmer
                                            ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
      Art             Belinda            Cory                 Debbie                               Evan

Figure 6-1: The employees at the five stations can communicate only with their immediate
neighbors.

     Let’s suppose that there are 7 parrots by Art at the main terminal, 5 parrots
by Belinda, 3 parrots by Cory, 10 parrots by Debbie, and 2 parrots by Evan at
the last station. The total number of parrots is thus 27. The question is, how
are the employees going to work together to communicate this total to Art?
Any solution to this problem is going to require a chain of communications
all the way from the main terminal to the end of the line and back. The staff
member at each platform will be requested to count parrots and will then
report his or her observations. Even so, there are two distinct approaches to
this communications chain, and those approaches correspond to the head
recursion and tail recursion techniques in programming.

Approach 1
In this approach, we keep a running total of the parrots as we progress
through the outbound communications. Each employee, when making the
request of the next employee down the line, passes along the number of par-
rots seen so far. When we get to the end of the line, Evan will be the first to
discover the parrot total, which he will pass up to Debbie, who will pass it to
Cory, and so on (as shown in Figure 6-2).
                2                 4                  6                                8
       1                 3                  5                       7                                  9




      Art              Belinda            Cory                 Debbie                               Evan
                13                12                11                               10


Figure 6-2: Numbering of steps taken in Approach 1 for the parrot-counting problem

1.   ART begins by counting the parrots around his platform. He counts
     7 parrots.
2.   ART to BELINDA: “There are 7 parrots here at the main terminal.”
3.   BELINDA counts 5 parrots around her platform for a running total of 12.
4.   BELINDA to CORY: “There are 12 parrots around the first two stations.”
5.   CORY counts 3 parrots.




                       Think Like a Programmer           S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   145
                        ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                  6.   CORY to DEBBIE: “There are 15 parrots around the first three stations.”
                  7.   DEBBIE counts 10 parrots.
                  8.   DEBBIE to EVAN: “There are 25 parrots around the first four stations.”
                  9.   EVAN counts 2 parrots and discovers that the total number of parrots is 27.
                  10. EVAN to DEBBIE: “The total number of parrots is 27.”
                  11. DEBBIE to CORY: “The total number of parrots is 27.”
                  12. CORY to BELINDA: “The total number of parrots is 27.”
                  13. BELINDA to ART: “The total number of parrots is 27.”

                       This approach is analogous to tail recursion. In tail recursion, the recur-
                  sive call happens after the processing—the recursive call is the last step in the
                  function. In the communications chain above, note that the “work” of the
                  employees—the parrot counting and summation—happens before they signal
                  the next employee down the line. All of the work happens on the outbound
                  communications chain, not the inbound chain. Here are the steps each
                  employee follows:

                  1.   Count the parrots visible from the station platform.
                  2.   Add this count to the total given by the previous station.
                  3.   Call the next station to pass along the running sum of parrot counts.
                  4.   Wait for the next station to call with the total parrot count, and then pass
                       this total up to the previous station.

                  Approach 2
                  In this approach, we sum the parrot counts from the other end. Each employee,
                  when contacting the next station down the line, requests the total number
                  of parrots from that station onward. The employee then adds the number of
                  parrots at his or her own station and passes this new total up the line (as shown
                  in Figure 6-3).
                                  1                 2                 3                 4




                        Art             Belinda             Cory            Debbie             Evan
                         13               11                 9                 7                 5
                                 12                 10                8                 6


                  Figure 6-3: Numbering of steps taken in Approach 2 for the parrot-counting problem

                  1.   ART to BELINDA: “What’s the total number of parrots from your station
                       to the end of the line?”
                  2.   BELINDA to CORY: “What’s the total number of parrots from your station
                       to the end of the line?”



146   Chapter 6                          Think Like a Programmer
                                          ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
3.   CORY to DEBBIE: “What’s the total number of parrots from your station
     to the end of the line?”
4.   DEBBIE to EVAN: “What’s the total number of parrots from your station
     to the end of the line?”
5.   EVAN is the end of the line. He counts 2 parrots.
6.   EVAN to DEBBIE: “The total number of parrots here at the end is 2.”
7.   DEBBIE counts 10 parrots at her station, so the total from her station to
     the end is 12.
8.   DEBBIE to CORY: “The total number of parrots from here to the end
     is 12.”
9.   CORY counts 3 parrots.
10. CORY to BELINDA: “The total number of parrots from here to the end
    is 15.”
11. BELINDA counts 5 parrots.
12. BELINDA to ART: “The total number of parrots from here to the end
    is 20.”
13. ART counts 7 parrots at the main terminal, making a total of 27.

     This approach is analogous to head recursion. In head recursion, the
recursive call happens before the other processing. Here, the call to the next
station happens first, before counting the parrots or the summation. The
“work” is postponed until after the stations down the line have reported their
totals. Here are the steps each employee follows:

1.   Call the next station.
2.   Count the parrots visible from the station platform.
3.   Add this count to the total given by the next station.
4.   Pass the resulting sum up to the previous station.

     You may have noticed two practical effects of the different approaches.
In the first approach, eventually all of the station employees will learn the
overall parrot total. In the second approach, only Art, at the main terminal,
learns the full total—but note that Art is the only employee who needs the
full total.
     The other practical effect will become more important for our analysis
when we transition the discussion to actual programming code. In the first
approach, each employee passes along the “running total” to the next station
down the line when making the request. In the second approach, the employee
simply makes the request for information from the next station, without passing
any data down the line. This effect is typical of the head recursion approach.
Because the recursive call happens first, before any other processing, there is
no new information to give the recursive call. In general, the head recursion
approach allows the minimum set of data to be passed to the recursive call.
Now let’s look at another problem.

                     Think Like a Programmer      S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   147
                      ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                                P R O B L E M : W H O ’ S O U R B E S T C U S TO M E R ?
                  The manager of DelegateCorp needs to determine which of eight customers produces
                  the most revenue for his company. Two factors complicate this otherwise simple task.
                  First, determining the total revenue for a customer requires going through that customer’s
                  whole file and tallying numbers on dozens of orders and receipts. Second, the employees
                  of DelegateCorp, as the name suggests, love to delegate, and each employee passes
                  work along to someone at a lower level whenever possible. To keep the situation from
                  getting out of hand, the manager enforces a rule: When you delegate, you must do
                  some portion of the work yourself, and you have to give the delegated employee less
                  work than you were given.


                          Tables 6-1 and 6-2 identify the employees and customers of DelegateCorp.

                  Table 6-1: DelegateCorp Employee Titles and Rank

                  Title                             Rank
                  Manager                           1
                  Vice manager                      2
                  Associate manager                 3
                  Assistant manager                 4
                  Junior manager                    5
                  Intern                            6


                  Table 6-2: DelegateCorp Customers

                  Customer Number         Revenue
                  #0001                   $172,000
                  #0002                   $68,000
                  #0003                   $193,000
                  #0004                   $13,000
                  #0005                   $256,000
                  #0006                   $99,000

                       Following the company rule on delegating work, here’s what will happen
                  to the six customer files. The manager will take one file and determine how
                  much revenue that customer has generated for the company. The manager
                  will delegate the other five files to the vice manager. The vice manager will
                  process one file and pass the other four to the associate manager. This pro-
                  cess continues until we reach the sixth employee, the intern, who is handed
                  one file and must simply process it, with no further delegation possible.
                       Figure 6-4 describes the lines of communication and the division of labor.
                  As with the previous example, though, there are two distinct approaches to
                  the communications chain.


148   Chapter 6                           Think Like a Programmer
                                           ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
            Manager                                      Manager
 1
                                                                                   16


        2                  16                        1                        15


            Vice Manager                                 Vice Manager
 3
                                                                                   14


        4                  15                        2                        13


            Associate Manager                            Associate Manager
 5
                                                                                   12


        6                  14                        3                        11


            Assistant Manager                            Assistant Manager
 7
                                                                                   10


        8                  13                        4                        9


            Junior Manager                               Junior Manager
 9
                                                                                    8


       10                  12                        5                        7



            Intern                                       Intern
11
                                                                                    6


                 (a)                                              (b)

Figure 6-4: The numbering of steps in Approach 1 (a) and Approach 2 (b)
for finding the highest-revenue customer


Approach 1
In this approach, when delegating the remaining files, the employee also
passes along the highest amount of revenue seen so far. This means that
the employee must tally the revenue in one file and compare this to the pre-
vious highest amount seen before delegating the remaining files to another
employee. Here’s an example of how this would proceed in practice.

1.   MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0001, which is $172,000.
2.   MANAGER to VICE MANAGER: “The highest revenue we have seen so
     far is $172,000, customer #0001. Take these five files and determine the
     overall highest revenue.”
3.   VICE MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0002, which is $68,000.
     The highest revenue seen so far is still $172,000, customer #0001.



                           Think Like a Programmer                 S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   149
                            ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                  4.   VICE MANAGER to ASSOCIATE MANAGER: “The highest revenue we
                       have seen so far is $172,000, customer #0001. Take these four files and
                       determine the overall highest revenue.”
                  5.   ASSOCIATE MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0003, which is
                       $193,000. The highest revenue seen so far is now $193,000, customer #0003.
                  6.   ASSOCIATE MANAGER to ASSISTANT MANAGER: “The highest revenue
                       we have seen so far is $193,000, customer #0003. Take these three files
                       and determine the overall highest revenue.”
                  7.   ASSISTANT MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0004, which is
                       $13,000. The highest revenue seen so far is still $193,000, customer #0003.
                  8.   ASSISTANT MANAGER to JUNIOR MANAGER: “The highest revenue
                       we have seen so far is $193,000, customer #0003. Take these two files and
                       determine the overall highest revenue.”
                  9.   JUNIOR MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0005, which is
                       $256,000. The highest revenue seen so far is now $256,000, customer #0005.
                  10. JUNIOR MANAGER to INTERN: “The highest revenue we have seen so
                      far is $256,000, customer #0005. Take this remaining file and determine
                      the overall highest revenue.”
                  11. INTERN tallies the revenue for customer #0006, which is $99,000. The
                      highest revenue seen so far is still $256,000, customer #0005.
                  12. INTERN to JUNIOR MANAGER: “The highest revenue of all customers
                      is $256,000, customer #0005.”
                  13. JUNIOR MANAGER to ASSISTANT MANAGER: “The highest revenue
                      of all customers is $256,000, customer #0005.”
                  14. ASSISTANT MANAGER to ASSOCIATE MANAGER: “The highest revenue
                      of all customers is $256,000, customer #0005.”
                  15. ASSOCIATE MANAGER to VICE MANAGER: “The highest revenue of
                      all customers is $256,000, customer #0005.”
                  16. VICE MANAGER to MANAGER: “The highest revenue of all customers
                      is $256,000, customer #0005.”

                      This approach, shown in Figure 6-4 (a), uses the tail recursion technique.
                  Each employee processes one customer file and compares the computed
                  revenue for that customer against the highest revenue seen so far. Then the
                  employee passes the result of that comparison to the subordinate employee.
                  The recursion—the passing off of work—happens after the other processing.
                  Each employee’s process runs like this:

                  1.   Tally the revenue in one customer file.
                  2.   Compare this total with the highest revenue seen by superiors in other
                       customer files.
                  3.   Pass the remaining customer files to a subordinate employee, along with
                       the highest revenue amount seen so far.
                  4.   When the subordinate employee returns the highest revenue of all the
                       customer files, pass this back to the superior.

150   Chapter 6                        Think Like a Programmer
                                        ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
Approach 2
In this approach, each employee begins by setting aside one file and then pass-
ing the others to the subordinate. In this case, the subordinate isn’t asked to
determine the highest revenue of all the files, just of the files the subordinate has
been given. As with the first sample problem, this simplifies the requests. Using
the same data as the first approach, the conversation would be as follows:

1.   MANAGER to VICE MANAGER: “Take these five customer files, and tell
     me the highest revenue.”
2.   VICE MANAGER to ASSOCIATE MANAGER: “Take these four customer
     files, and tell me the highest revenue.”
3.   ASSOCIATE MANAGER to ASSISTANT MANAGER: “Take these three
     customer files, and tell me the highest revenue.”
4.   ASSISTANT MANAGER to JUNIOR MANAGER: “Take these two customer
     files, and tell me the highest revenue.”
5.   JUNIOR MANAGER to INTERN: “Take this one customer file, and tell
     me the highest revenue.”
6.   INTERN tallies the revenue for customer #0006, which is $99,000. This is
     the only file the INTERN has seen, so that’s the highest revenue.
7.   INTERN to JUNIOR MANAGER: “The highest revenue in my files is
     $99,000, customer #0006.”
8.   JUNIOR MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0005, which is
     $256,000. The highest revenue this employee knows about is $256,000,
     customer #0005.
9.   JUNIOR MANAGER to ASSISTANT MANAGER: “The highest revenue
     in my files is $256,000, customer #0005.”
10. ASSISTANT MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0004, which
    is $13,000. The highest revenue this employee knows about is $256,000,
    customer #0005.
11. ASSISTANT MANAGER to ASSOCIATE MANAGER: “The highest reve-
    nue in my files is $256,000, customer #0005.”
12. ASSOCIATE MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0003, which is
    $193,000. The highest revenue this employee knows about is $256,000,
    customer #0005.
13. ASSOCIATE MANAGER to VICE MANAGER: “The highest revenue in
    my files is $256,000, customer #0005.”
14. VICE MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0002, which is
    $68,000. The highest revenue this employee knows about is $256,000,
    customer #0005.
15. VICE MANAGER to MANAGER: “The highest revenue in my files is
    $256,000, customer #0005.”
16. MANAGER tallies the revenue for customer #0001, which is $172,000. The
    highest revenue this employee knows about is $256,000, customer #0005.

                      Think Like a Programmer        S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   151
                       ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                        This approach, shown in Figure 6-4 (b), uses the head recursion tech-
                   nique. Each employee still has to tally the revenue in one customer file, but
                   that action is postponed until after the subordinate employee determines the
                   highest revenue among the remaining files. The process each employee takes
                   is as follows:

                   1.   Pass all customer files except one to a subordinate employee.
                   2.   Get the highest revenue of those files back from the subordinate employee.
                   3.   Tally the revenue in the one customer file.
                   4.   Pass the larger of those two revenues to the superior.

                       As in the “counting parrots” problem, the head recursion technique
                   allows each employee to pass the minimum amount of information to the
                   subordinate.

      The Big Recursive Idea
                   We now arrive at the Big Recursive Idea. In fact, if you’ve read through the
                   steps of the sample problems, you have already seen the BRI in action.
                        How so? Both of the sample problems follow the form of a recursive solu-
                   tion. Each person in the communications chain performs the same steps on
                   a smaller and smaller subset of the original data. It’s important to note,
                   however, that the problems involve no recursion at all.
                        In the first problem, each railway employee makes a request of the next
                   station down the line, and in fulfilling that request, the next employee fol-
                   lows the same steps as the previous employee. But nothing in the wording of
                   the request requires an employee to follow those particular steps. When Art
                   called Belinda using Approach 2, for example, he asked her to count the
                   total number of parrots from her station to the end of the line. He did not
                   dictate a method for discovering this total. If he thought about it, he might
                   have realized that Belinda would have to follow the same steps that he him-
                   self was following, but he doesn’t have to consider this. To complete his task,
                   all Art required was for Belinda to provide the correct answer to the question
                   he asked.
                        Likewise, in the second problem, each employee in the management
                   chain hands off as much work as possible to a subordinate. The assistant
                   manager, for example, may know the junior manager well and expect the
                   junior manager to hand all of the files but one to the intern. However, the
                   assistant manager has no reason to care whether the junior manager pro-
                   cesses all of the remaining files or passes some of them off to a subordinate.
                   The assistant manager cares only that the junior manager returns the right
                   answer. Because the assistant manager is not going to repeat the work of the
                   junior manager, the assistant manager simply assumes that the result returned
                   by the junior manager is correct and uses that data to solve the overall task
                   that the assistant manager received from the associate manager.



152    Chapter 6                        Think Like a Programmer
                                         ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
     In both problems, when employees make requests of other employees, they
are concerned with what but not how. A question is handed off; an answer is
received. This, then, is the Big Recursive Idea: If you follow certain conven-
tions in your coding, you can pretend that no recursion is taking place. You can even
use a cheap trick (shown below) to move from an iterative implementation to
a recursive implementation, without explicitly considering how the recursion
is actually solving the problem. Over time, you will develop an intuitive under-
standing of how recursive solutions work, but before that intuition develops,
you can craft recursive implementations and be confident in your code.
     Let’s put the concept into practice through a code example.


                   PROBLEM: COMPUTING THE SUM
                     OF AN ARRAY OF INTEGERS
Write a recursive function that is given an array of integers and the size of the array
as parameters. The function returns the sum of the integers in the array.


    Your first thought may have been that this problem would be trivial to
solve iteratively. Indeed, let’s start with an iterative solution to this problem:

int iterativeArraySum(int integers[], int size) {
    int sum = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
        sum += integers[i];
    }
    return sum;
}

     You saw code very similar to this in Chapter 3, so the function should be
simple to understand. The next step is to write code that is halfway between
the iterative solution and the final desired recursive solution. We will keep the
iterative function and add a second function we will refer to as a dispatcher. The
dispatcher will hand off most of the work to the previously written iterative
function and use this information to solve the overall problem. To write a
dispatcher, we have to follow two rules:

1.   The dispatcher must completely handle the most trivial case, without
     calling the iterative function.
2.   The dispatcher, when calling the iterative function, must pass a smaller
     version of the problem.

     In applying the first rule to this problem, we must decide what the most
trivial case is. If size is 0, then the function has conceptually been passed a
“null” array, with a sum of 0. One could also make the argument that the
most trivial case should be when size is 1. In that case, there would be only
one number in the logical array, and we could return that number as the


                       Think Like a Programmer         S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   153
                        ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                  sum. Either of these interpretations will work, but making the first choice
                  allows the function to handle a special case. Note that the original iterative
                  function will not fail when size is zero, so it would be preferable to maintain
                  that flexibility.
                       To apply the second rule to this problem, we must figure out a way to
                  pass a smaller version of the problem from the dispatcher to the iterative
                  function. There is no easy way to pass a smaller array, but we can easily pass a
                  smaller value for size. If the dispatcher is given the value of 10 for size, the
                  function is being asked to compute the sum of 10 values in the array. If the
                  dispatcher passes 9 as the value of size to the iterative function, it is request-
                  ing the sum of the first 9 values in the array. The dispatcher can then add the
                  value of the one remaining value in the array (the 10th) to compute the sum
                  of all 10 values. Note that reducing size by 1 when calling the iterative func-
                  tion maximizes the work of the iterative function and thereby minimizes the
                  work of the dispatcher. This is always the desired approach—like the managers
                  of DelegateCorp, the dispatcher function avoids as much work as possible.
                       Putting these ideas together, here’s a dispatcher function for this problem:

                  int arraySumDelegate(int integers[], int size) {
                    if (size == 0) return 0;
                    int lastNumber = integers[size - 1];
                      int allButLastSum = iterativeArraySum(integers, size - 1);
                    return lastNumber + allButLastSum;
                  }


                       The first statement enforces the first rule of dispatchers: It checks for a
                  trivial case and handles it completely, in this case, by returning 0 . Otherwise,
                  control passes to the remaining code, which enforces the second rule. The last
                  number in the array is stored in a local variable called lastNumber , and then
                  the sum of all the other values in the array is computed via a call to the itera-
                  tive function . This result is stored in another local variable, allButLastSum,
                  and finally the function returns the sum of the two local variables .
                       If we have correctly created a dispatcher function, we have already effec-
                  tively created a recursive solution. This is the Big Recursive Idea in action. To
                  convert this iterative solution to a recursive solution requires but one further,
                  simple step: have the delegate function call itself where it was previously call-
                  ing the iterative function. We can then remove the iterative function altogether.

                  int arraySumRecursive(int integers[], int size) {
                      if (size == 0) return 0;
                      int lastNumber = integers[size - 1];
                      int allButLastSum = arraySumRecursive(integers, size - 1);
                      return lastNumber + allButLastSum;
                  }




154   Chapter 6                        Think Like a Programmer
                                        ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
             Only two changes have been made to the previous code. The name of the
       function has been changed to better describe its new form , and the func-
       tion now calls itself where it previously called the iterative function . The
       logic of the two functions, arraySumDelegate and arraySumRecursive, is identical.
       Each function checks for a trivial case in which the sum is already known—in
       this case, an array of size 0 that has a sum of 0. Otherwise, each function com-
       putes the sum of values in the array by making a function call to compute the
       sum of all of the values, save the last one. Finally, each function adds that last
       value to the returned sum for a grand total. The only difference is that the
       first version of the function calls another function, while the recursive version
       calls itself. The BRI tells us that if we follow the rules outlined above for writ-
       ing the dispatcher, we can ignore that distinction.
             You do not need to literally follow all of the steps shown above to follow
       the BRI. In particular, you usually would not implement an iterative solution
       to the problem before implementing a recursive solution. Writing an iterative
       function as a stepping-stone is extra work that will eventually be thrown away.
       Besides, recursion is best applied to situations in which an iterative solution
       is difficult, as explained later. However, you can follow the outline of the BRI
       without actually writing the iterative solution. The key is thinking of a recur-
       sive call as a call to another function, without regards to the internals of that
       function. In this way, you remove the complexities of recursive logic from the
       recursive solution.

Common Mistakes
       As shown above, with the right approach, recursive solutions can often be
       very easy to write. But it can be just as easy to come up with an incorrect
       recursive implementation or a recursive solution that “works” but is ungainly.
       Most problems with recursive implementations stem from two basic faults:
       overthinking the problem or beginning implementation without a clear plan.
           Overthinking recursive problems is common for new programmers because
       limited experience and lack of confidence with recursion lead them to think
       that the problem is more difficult than it really is. Code produced by over-
       thinking can be recognized by its too-careful appearance. For example, a
       recursive function might have several special cases where it needs only one.
           Beginning implementation too soon can lead to overcomplicated “Rube
       Goldberg” code, where unforeseen interactions lead to fixes that are bolted
       onto the original code.
           Let’s look at some specific mistakes and how to avoid them.

       Too Many Parameters
       As described previously, the head recursion technique can reduce the data
       passed to the recursive call, while the tail recursion technique can result in
       passing additional data to recursive calls. Programmers often get stuck in the
       tail recursion mode because they overthink and start implementation too soon.



                            Think Like a Programmer        S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   155
                             ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                       Consider our problem of recursively computing the sum of an array of
                  integers. Writing an iterative solution to this problem, the programmer knows
                  a “running total” variable will be needed (in the iterative solution provided, I
                  called this sum) and the array will be summed starting from the first element.
                  Considering the recursive solution, the programmer naturally imagines an
                  implementation that most directly mirrors the iterative solution, with a running
                  total variable and the first recursive call handling the first element in the
                  array. This approach, however, requires the recursive function to pass the
                  running total and the location where the next recursive call should begin
                  processing. Such a solution would look like this:

int arraySumRecursiveExtraParams(int integers[], int size, int sum, int currentIndex) {
    if (currentIndex == size) return sum;
    sum += integers[currentIndex];
    return arraySumRecursiveExtraParameters(integers, size, sum, currentIndex + 1);
}

                       This code is as short as the other recursive version but considerably
                  more semantically complex because of the additional parameters, sum 
                  and currentIndex . From the client code’s point of view, the extra parame-
                  ters are meaningless and will always have to be zeroes in the call, as shown
                  in this example:

                  int a[10] = {20, 3, 5, 22, 7, 9, 14, 17, 4, 9};
                  int total = arraySumRecursiveExtraParameters(a, 10, 0, 0);

                       This problem can be avoided with the use of a wrapper function, as described
                  in the next section, but because we can’t eliminate those parameters alto-
                  gether, that’s not the best solution. The iterative function for this problem
                  and the original recursive function answer the question, what is the sum of
                  this array with this many elements? In contrast, this second recursive func-
                  tion is being asked, what is the sum of this array if it has this many elements,
                  we are starting with this particular element, and this is the sum of all the
                  prior elements?
                       The “too many parameters” problem is avoided by choosing your func-
                  tion parameters before thinking about recursion. In other words, force
                  yourself to use the same parameter list you would if the solution were itera-
                  tive. If you use the full BRI process and actually write the iterative function
                  first, you will avoid this problem automatically. If you skip using the whole
                  process formally, though, you can still use the idea conceptually if you write
                  out the parameter list based on what you would expect for an iterative
                  function.

                  Global Variables
                  Avoiding too many parameters sometimes leads programmers into making a
                  different mistake: using global variables to pass data from one recursive call
                  to the other. The use of global variables is generally a poor programming
                  practice, although it is sometimes permissible for performance reasons. Global

156   Chapter 6                        Think Like a Programmer
                                        ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
variables should always be avoided in recursive functions when possible. Let’s
look at a specific problem to see how programmers talk themselves into this
mistake. Suppose we were asked to write a recursive function that counted the
number of zeros appearing in an array of integers. This is a simple problem
to solve using iteration:

int zeroCountIterative(int numbers[], int size) {
   int sum = 0;
  int count = 0;
   for (int i = 0; i < size; i++) {
      if (numbers[i] == 0) count ++;
   }
   return count;
}

    The logic of this code is straightforward. We’re just running through the
array from the first location to the last, counting up the zeroes as we go and
using a local variable, count , as a tracker. If we have a function like this in
our minds when we write our recursive function, though, we may assume that
we need a tracker variable in that version as well. We can’t simply declare
count as a local variable in the recursive version because then it would be a
new variable in each recursive call. So we might be tempted to declare it as a
global variable:

int count;
int zeroCountRecursive(int numbers[], int size) {
   if (size == 0) return count;
   if (numbers[size - 1] == 0) count++;
   zeroCountRecursive(numbers, size - 1);
}

     This code works, but the global variable is entirely unnecessary and causes
all the problems global variables typically cause, such as poor readability and
more difficult code maintenance. Some programmers might attempt to miti-
gate the problem by making the variable local, but static:

int zeroCountStatic(int numbers[], int size) {
  static int count = 0;
   if (size == 0) return count;
   if (numbers[size - 1] == 0) count++;
   zeroCountStatic(numbers, size - 1);
}

     In C++, a local variable declared as static retains its value from one func-
tion call to the next; thus, the local static variable count  would act the same
as the global variable in the previous version. So what’s the problem? The ini-
tialization of the variable to zero  happens only the first time the function
is called. This is necessary for the static declaration to be of any use, but it
means that the function will return a correct answer only the first time it is
called. If this function were called twice—first with an array that had three

                     Think Like a Programmer        S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   157
                      ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                   zeros, then with an array that had five zeros—the function would return an
                   answer of eight for the second array because count would be starting where it
                   had left off.
                       The solution to avoiding the global variable in this case is to use the BRI.
                   We can assume that a recursive call with a smaller value for size will return
                   the correct result and compute the correct value for the overall array from
                   that. This will lead to a head-recursive solution:

                   int zeroCountRecursive(int numbers[], int size) {
                      if (size == 0) return 0;
                     int count = zeroCountRecursive(numbers, size - 1);
                     if (numbers[size - 1] == 0) count++;
                     return count;
                   }

                       In this function, we still have a local variable, count , but here no attempt
                   is made to maintain its value from one call to the next. Instead, it stores the
                   return value from our recursive call; we optionally increment the variable 
                   before returning it .

      Applying Recursion to Dynamic Data Structures
                   Recursion is often applied to dynamic structures such as linked lists, trees,
                   and graphs. The more complicated the structure, the more the coding can
                   benefit from a recursive solution. Processing complicated structures is often
                   a lot like finding one’s way through a maze, and recursion allows us to back-
                   track to previous steps in our processing.

                   Recursion and Linked Lists
                   Let’s start, though, with the most basic of dynamic structures, a linked list. For
                   discussions in this section, let’s assume we have the simplest of node structures
                   for our linked list, just a single int for data. Here are our type declarations:

                   struct listNnode {
                       int data;
                       listNode * next;
                   };
                   typedef listNode * listPtr;

                        Applying the BRI to a singly linked list follows the same general outline
                   regardless of the specific task. Recursion requires us to divide the problem,
                   to be able to pass a reduced version of the original problem to the recursive
                   call. There is only one practical way to divide a singly linked list: the first node in
                   the list and the rest of the list.
                        In Figure 6-5, we see a sample list divided into unequal parts: the first
                   node and all of the other nodes. Conceptually, we can view the “rest of” the
                   original list as its own list, starting with the second node in the original list. It
                   is this view that allows the recursion to work smoothly.

158    Chapter 6                          Think Like a Programmer
                                           ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
listHead                  7            12            9                14 NULL
                        First node    Rest of list

Figure 6-5: A list divided into a first node and “the rest of the list”

     Again, though, we are not
required to picture all the steps of listHead
the recursion to make the recur-
                                                                 7

                                                               First node    Rest of list
                                                                                                             ?
sion work. From the point of view
of someone writing a recursive         Figure 6-6: The list as a programmer using
function to process a linked list, it recursion should picture it: a first node and the
can be conceptualized as the first rest of the list as a nebulous shape to be passed
node, which we have to deal with, off to the recursive call
and the rest of the list, which we
don’t and therefore aren’t con-
cerned about. This attitude is
shown in Figure 6-6.
     With the division of labor fixed, we can say that recursive processing of
singly linked lists will proceed according to the following general plan. Given
a linked list L and a question Q:

1.   If L is minimal, we directly assign a default value. Otherwise . . .
2.   Use a recursive call to produce an answer to Q for the “rest of” list L (the
     list starting with the second node of L).
3.   Inspect the value in the first node of L.
4.   Use the results of the previous two steps to answer Q for the whole of L.

    As you can see, this is just a straightforward application of the BRI given
the practical restrictions on breaking up a linked list. Now let’s apply this
blueprint to a specific problem.


                    P R O B L E M : C O U N T IN G N E G A T I V E
                   NUMBERS IN A SINGLY LINKED LIST
Write a recursive function that is given a singly linked list where the data type is integer.
The function returns the count of negative numbers in the list.


     The question, Q, we want to answer is, how many negative numbers are
in the list? Therefore, our plan can be stated as:

1.   If the list has no nodes, the count is 0 by default. Otherwise . . .
2.   Use a recursive call to count how many negative numbers are in the “rest
     of” the list.
3.   See whether the value in the first node of the list is negative.


                         Think Like a Programmer              S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   159
                          ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                  4.   Use the results of the previous two steps to determine how many negative
                       numbers are in the whole list.

                       Here’s a function implementation that follows directly from this plan:

                  int countNegative(listPtr head) {
                      if (head == NULL) return 0;
                      int listCount = countNegative(head->next);
                      if (head->data < 0) listCount++;
                      return listCount;
                  }

                       Note how this code follows the same principles as previous examples. It
                  will count the negative numbers “backward,” from the end of the list to the
                  front. Also note that the code employs the head recursion technique; we pro-
                  cess the “rest of” the list before we process the first node. As before, this allows
                  us to avoid passing extra data in the recursive call or using global variables.
                       Also notice how linked-list rule 1, “if list L is minimal,” is interpreted in
                  the specific implementation of this problem as “if the list has no nodes.” That’s
                  because it is meaningful to say that a list with no nodes has zero negative values.
                  In some cases, though, there is no meaningful answer for our question Q for
                  a list with no nodes, and the minimal case is a list with one node. Suppose
                  our question was, what’s the largest number in this list? That question cannot
                  be answered for a list with no values. If you don’t see why, pretend you are an
                  elementary school teacher, and your class happens to be all girls. If your school’s
                  principal asked you how many boys in your classroom were members of the
                  boy’s choir, you could simply answer zero because you have no boys. If your
                  principal asked you to name the tallest boy in your class, you could not give a
                  meaningful answer to that question—you would have to have at least one boy
                  to have a tallest boy. In the same way, if the question about a data set requires
                  at least one value to be meaningfully answered, the minimal data set is one
                  item. You may still want to return something for the “size zero” case, however,
                  if only for flexibility in the use of the function and to guard against a crash.

                  Recursion and Binary Trees
                  All of the examples we have explored so far make no more than one recursive
                  call. More complicated structures, however, may require multiple recursive
                  calls. For a taste of how that works, let’s consider the structure known as a
                  binary tree, in which each node contains “left” and “right” links to other nodes.
                  Here are the types we’ll use:

                  struct treeNode {
                      int data;
                      treeNode * left;
                      treeNode * right;
                  };
                  typedef treeNode * treePtr;



160   Chapter 6                         Think Like a Programmer
                                         ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
      Because each node in the tree points to two other nodes, recursive tree-
processing functions require two recursive calls. We conceptualized linked
lists as having two parts: a first node and the rest of the list. For applying
recursion, we will conceptualize trees as having three parts: the node at the
top, known as the root node; all of the nodes reached from the left link of the
root, known as the left subtree; and all of the nodes reached from the right
link of the root, known as the right subtree. This conceptualization is shown
in Figure 6-7. As with the linked list and as developers of a recursive solution,
we just focus on the existence of the left and right subtrees, without consider-
ing their contents. This is shown in Figure 6-8.

                                                                       left data right
                                        root node
                                                17
                                                                      treeNode struct

                       4                                             144



     NULL   3   NULL       NULL    16    NULL        NULL   99 NULL    NULL 217 NULL

 left subtree                                        right subtree

Figure 6-7: A binary tree divided into a root node and left and right subtree


     As always, when recursively solving                                                     root node
problems involving binary trees, we want                                                                17
to employ the BRI. We will make recursive
function calls and assume they return cor-
rect results without worrying about how the
recursive process solves the overall prob-
lem. As with linked lists, we will work with
                                                                                   ?
                                                                            left subtree
                                                                                                                          ?
                                                                                                                  right subtree
the natural divisions of a binary tree. This
                                                                           Figure 6-8: A binary tree as a pro-
produces the following general plan. To
                                                                           grammer using recursion should
answer a question Q for tree T:                                            picture it: a root node with left and
                                                                           right subtrees of unknown and
1.     If tree T is of minimal size, directly                              unconsidered structure
       assign a default value. Otherwise . . .
2.     Make a recursive call to answer Q for the left subtree of T.
3.     Make a recursive call to answer Q for the right subtree of T.
4.     Inspect the value in the root node of T.
5.     Use the results of the previous three steps to answer Q for all of T.

       Now let’s apply the general plan to a specific problem.




                                  Think Like a Programmer                   S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   161
                                   ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                       P R O B L E M : F I N D T H E L A R G E ST V A L U E I N A B I N A R Y T R E E
                  Write a function that, when given a binary tree where each node holds an integer,
                  returns the largest integer in the tree.


                      Applying the general plan to this specific problem results in the follow-
                  ing steps:

                  1.    If the root of the tree has no children, return the value in the root.
                        Otherwise . . .
                  2.    Make a recursive call to find the largest value in the left subtree.
                  3.    Make a recursive call to find the largest value in the right subtree.
                  4.    Inspect the value in the root node.
                  5.    Return the largest of the values in the previous three steps.

                        With those steps in mind, we can directly write the code for the solution:

                  int maxValue(treePtr root) {
                    if (root == NULL) return 0;
                    if (root->right == NULL && root->left == NULL)
                          return root->data;
                    int leftMax = maxValue(root->left);
                    int rightMax = maxValue(root->right);
                    int maxNum = root->data;
                      if (leftMax > maxNum) maxNum = leftMax;
                      if (rightMax > maxNum) maxNum = rightMax;
                      return maxNum;
                  }

                      Notice how the minimal tree for this problem is a single node  (although
                  the empty-tree case is covered for safety ). This is because the question we
                  are asking can only be meaningfully answered with at least one data value.
                  Consider the practical problem if we tried to make the empty tree the base
                  case. What value could we return? If we return zero, we implicitly require
                  some positive values in the tree; if all of the values in the tree are negative,
                  zero will be erroneously returned as the largest value in the tree. We might
                  solve this problem by returning the lowest (most negative) possible integer,
                  but then we would have to be careful adapting the code for other numeric
                  types. By making a single node the base case, we avoid this decision altogether.
                      The rest of the code is straightforward. We use recursion to find the max-
                  imum values in the left  and right subtrees . Then we find the largest of
                  the three values (value at root, largest in left subtree, largest in right subtree)
                  using a variant of the “King of the Hill” algorithm we’ve been using through-
                  out this book .




162   Chapter 6                           Think Like a Programmer
                                           ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
Wrapper Functions
       In the previous examples in this chapter, we have discussed only the recur-
       sive function itself. In some cases, however, the recursive function needs
       to be “set up” by a second function. Most commonly, this occurs when we
       write recursive functions inside of class structures. This can cause a mismatch
       between the parameters required for the recursive function and the parame-
       ters needed for a public method of the class. Because classes typically enforce
       information hiding, the class client code may not have access to the data or
       types the recursive function requires. This problem and its solution are shown
       in the next example.


       P R O B L E M : F I N D T H E N U M BE R O F L E A V E S I N A B I N A R Y T R E E
       For a class that implements a binary tree, add a publicly accessible method that returns
       the number of leaves (nodes without children) in the tree. The counting of leaves should
       be performed using recursion.


           Let’s sketch the outline of what this class might look like before we try
       to implement a solution to this problem. For simplicity, we will include only
       the relevant parts of the class, ignoring the constructors, the destructor, and
       even the methods that would allow us to build the tree in order to focus on
       our recursive method.

       class binaryTree {
           public:
             int countLeaves();
           private:
               struct binaryTreeNode {
                    int data;
                    binaryTreeNode * left;
                    binaryTreeNode * right;
               };
               typedef treeNode * treePtr;
               treePtr _root;
       };

           Note that our leaf-counting function takes no parameters . From an
       interface point of view, this is exactly correct. Consider a sample call for a
       previously constructed binaryTree object bt:

       int numLeaves = bt.countLeaves();

            After all, if we are asking the tree how many leaves it has, what informa-
       tion could we possibly provide to the object that it would not already know
       about itself? As correct as this is for the interface, it’s all wrong for the recur-
       sive implementation. If there is no parameter, what changes from one recursive



                              Think Like a Programmer         S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   163
                               ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                  call to the next? Nothing can change in that case, except through global vari-
                  ables, which, as stated earlier, are to be avoided. If nothing changes, there’s
                  no way for the recursion to progress or terminate.
                       The way around this problem is to write the recursive function first,
                  conceptualizing it as a function outside of a class. In other words, we’ll write
                  this function to count the leaves in a binary tree in the same style we wrote
                  the function to find the largest value in a binary tree. The one parameter we
                  need to pass is a pointer to our node structure.
                       This gives us another opportunity to employ the BRI. What is the ques-
                  tion Q in this case? It is, how many leaves are in the tree? Applying the general
                  plan for recursively processing binary trees to this specific problem results in
                  the following:

                  1.   If the root of the tree has no children, then the tree has one node total.
                       That node is a leaf by definition, so return 1. Otherwise . . .
                  2.   Make a recursive call to count the leaves in the left subtree.
                  3.   Make a recursive call to count the leaves in the right subtree.
                  4.   In this case, there is no need to inspect the root node because if we get to
                       this step, there is no way the root is a leaf. So . . .
                  5.   Return the sum of steps 2 and 3.

                       Translating this plan into code results in this:

                  struct binaryTreeNode {
                      int data;
                      treeNode * left;
                      treeNode * right;
                  };
                  typedef binaryTreeNode * treePtr;
                  int countLeaves(treePtr rootPtr) {
                      if (rootPtr == NULL) return 0;
                      if (rootPtr->right == NULL && rootPtr->left == NULL)
                          return 1;
                      int leftCount = countLeaves(rootPtr->left);
                      int rightCount = countLeaves(rootPtr->right);
                      return leftCount + rightCount;
                  }

                       As you can see, the code is a direct translation of the plan. The question
                  is, how do we get from this independent function to something we can use in
                  the class? This is where the unwary programmer could easily get into trouble,
                  thinking that we need to use a global variable or make the root pointer pub-
                  lic. But we don’t need to do that; we can keep everything inside the class.
                  The trick is to use a wrapper function. First, we put the independent function,
                  with the treePtr parameter, in the private section of our class. Then, we write
                  a public function, the wrapper function, which will “wrap” the private function.




164   Chapter 6                         Think Like a Programmer
                                         ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
        Because the public function has access to the private data member root, it
        can pass this along to the recursive function and then return the results back
        to the client like this:

        class binaryTree {
            public:
                int publicCountLeaves();
            private:
                struct binaryTreeNode {
                     int data;
                     binaryTreeNode * left;
                     binaryTreeNode * right;
                };
                typedef binaryTreeNode * treePtr;
                treePtr _root;
                int privateCountLeaves(treePtr rootPtr);
        };
       int binaryTree::privateCountLeaves(treePtr rootPtr) {
            if (rootPtr == NULL) return 0;
            if (rootPtr->right == NULL && rootPtr->left == NULL)
                return 1;
            int leftCount = privateCountLeaves(rootPtr->left);
            int rightCount = privateCountLeaves(rootPtr->right);
            return leftCount + rightCount;
        }
       int binaryTree::publicCountLeaves() {
           return privateCountLeaves(_root);
        }

             Although C++ would allow both functions to have the same name, for
        clarity I’ve used different names to distinguish between the public and pri-
        vate “count leaves” functions. The code in privateCountLeaves  is exactly the
        same as our previous, independent function countLeaves. The wrapper func-
        tion publicCountLeaves  is simple. It calls privateCountLeaves, passing the
        private data member root, and returns the result . In essence, it “primes
        the pump” of the recursive process. Wrapper functions are very helpful
        when writing recursive functions inside classes, but they can be used any-
        time a mismatch exists between the parameter list required by a function
        and the desired parameter list of a caller.

When to Choose Recursion
        New programmers often wonder why anyone has to deal with recursion.
        They may have already learned that any program can be constructed using
        basic control structures, such as selection (if statements) and iteration (for
        and while loops). If recursion is more difficult to employ than basic control
        structures and unnecessary, perhaps recursion should just be ignored.
            There are several rebuttals to this. First, programming recursively helps
        programmers think recursively, and recursive thinking is employed through-
        out the world of computer science in such areas as compiler design. Second,


                             Think Like a Programmer     S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   165
                              ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                  some languages simply require recursion because they lack some basic control
                  structures. Pure versions of the Lisp language, for example, require recursion
                  in almost every nontrivial function.
                       The question remains, though: If a programmer has studied recursion
                  enough to “get it” and is using a full-featured language such as C++, Java, or
                  Python, should recursion ever be employed? Does recursion have practical
                  use in such languages, or is it just a mental exercise?

                  Arguments Against Recursion
                  To explore this question, let’s enumerate the bad features of recursion.
                  Conceptual complexity
                     For most problems, it’s more difficult for the average programmer to
                     solve a problem using recursion. Even once you understand the Big
                     Recursive Idea, it’s still going to be easier in most cases to write code
                     using loops.
                  Performance
                      Function calls incur significant overhead. Recursion involves lots of func-
                      tion calls and, therefore, can be slow.
                  Space requirements
                     Recursion doesn’t simply employ many function calls; it also nests them.
                     That is, you can end up with a long chain of function calls waiting for
                     other calls to complete. Each function call that has begun but has yet to
                     end takes additional space on the system stack.
                      At a glance, this list of features constitutes a strong indictment against
                  recursion as difficult, slow, and wasteful of space. However, these arguments
                  do not hold universally. The most basic rule, then, for deciding between
                  recursion and iteration is, choose recursion when these arguments do not apply.
                      Consider our function that counts the number of leaves in a binary tree.
                  How would you solve this problem without recursion? It’s possible, but you
                  would need an explicit mechanism for maintaining the “breadcrumb trail” of
                  nodes for which the left children had already been visited but not the right
                  children. These nodes would need to be revisited at some point so we could
                  travel down the right side. You might store these nodes in a dynamic structure,
                  such as a stack. For comparison, here’s an implementation of the function
                  that uses the stack class from the C++ standard template library:

                  int binaryTree::stackBasedCountLeaves() {
                      if (_root == NULL) return 0;
                      int leafCount = 0;
                    stack<binaryTreeNode *> nodes;
                    nodes.push(_root);
                      while (!nodes.empty()) {
                          treePtr currentNode = nodes.top();
                        nodes.pop();
                          if (currentNode->left == NULL && currentNode->right == NULL)
                              leafCount++;


166   Chapter 6                       Think Like a Programmer
                                       ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
        else {
            if (currentNode->right != NULL) nodes.push(currentNode->right);
            if (currentNode->left != NULL) nodes.push(currentNode->left);
        }
    }
    return leafCount;
}

     This code follows the same pattern as the original, but if you’ve never used
the stack class before, a few comments are in order. The stack class works like the
system stack we discussed in Chapter 3; you can add and remove items only at
the top. Note that we could perform our leaf count operation using any data
structure that doesn’t have a fixed size. We could have used a vector, for
example, but the use of the stack most directly mirrors the original code. When
we declare the stack , we specify the type of items we will store there. In this
case, we would store pointers to our binaryTreeNode structure . We make use
of four stack class methods in this code. The push method  places an item
(a node pointer, in this case) on the top of the stack. The empty method 
tells us whether there are any items left on the stack. The top method  gives
us a copy of the item on top of the stack, and the pop method  removes the
top item from the stack.
     The code solves the problem by placing a pointer to the first node on the
stack and then repeatedly removing a pointer to a node from the stack, check-
ing whether it’s a leaf, incrementing our counter if it is, and placing pointers
to child nodes, if they exist, on the stack. So the stack keeps track of the nodes
we have discovered, but have yet to process, in the same way that the chain of
recursive calls in the recursive version keeps track of nodes we must revisit. In
comparing this iterative version to the recursive version, we see that none of
the standard objections to recursion applies with much vigor in this case. First,
this code is longer and more complicated than the recursive version, so there
is no argument against the recursive version on the basis of conceptual com-
plexity. Second, look how many function calls stackBasedCountLeaves makes—
for each visit to an interior node (i.e., not a leaf), this function makes four
function calls: one each to empty and top, and two to push. The recursive ver-
sion makes only the two recursive calls for each interior node. (Note that it is
possible for us to avoid the function calls to the stack object by incorporating
the logic of the stack within the function. This, however, would increase the
complexity of the function even further.) Third, while this iterative version
doesn’t use additional system stack space, it makes explicit use of a private
stack. In fairness, this is less space than the system stack overhead of the
recursive calls, but it’s still an expenditure of system memory in proportion
to the maximum depth of the binary tree we are traversing.
     Because the objections against recursion are mitigated or minimized in
this case, recursion is a good choice for the problem. Put more generally, if a
problem is simple to solve iteratively, then iteration should be your first choice.
Recursion should be used when iteration would be complicated. Often this
involves the necessity of the “breadcrumb trail” mechanism shown here.



                     Think Like a Programmer        S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   167
                      ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
                  Traversals of branching structures, such as trees and graphs, are inherently
                  recursive. Processing linear structures, such as arrays and linked lists, usually
                  does not require recursion, but there are exceptions. You will never go wrong
                  making a first stab at a problem using iteration and seeing how far you get.
                  As a last set of examples, consider the following linked-list problems.


                            PR O BL E M : D I S PL A Y A LI N KE D L I S T I N O R D E R
                  Write a function that is passed the head pointer of a singly linked list where the data
                  type of each node is an integer and that displays those integers, one per line, in the
                  order they appear in the list.




                    PROBLEM: DISPLAY A LINKED LIST IN REVERSE ORDER
                  Write a function that is passed the head pointer of a singly linked list where the data
                  type of each node is an integer and that displays those integers, one per line, in the
                  reverse order they appear in the list.


                      Because these problems are mirror images of each other, it’s natural to
                  assume that their implementations would likewise be mirror images. That is
                  indeed the case for recursive implementations. Using the listNode and listPtr
                  type given previously, here are recursive functions to solve both of these
                  problems:

                  void displayListForwardsRecursion(listPtr head) {
                      if (head != NULL) {
                          cout << head->data << "\n";
                          displayListForwardsRecursion(head->next);
                      }
                  }
                  void displayListBackwardsRecursion(listPtr head) {
                      if (head != NULL) {
                          displayListBackwardsRecursion(head->next);
                          cout << head->data << "\n";
                      }
                  }

                      As you can see, the code in these functions is identical except for the
                  order of the two statements inside the if statement. That makes all the dif-
                  ference. In the first case, we display the value in the first node  before
                  making the recursive call to display the rest of the list . In the second case,
                  we make the call to display the rest of the list  before we display the value in
                  the first node . This results in an overall backward display.




168   Chapter 6                          Think Like a Programmer
                                          ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
    Because both of these functions are equally succinct, one might assume
that recursion is properly used to solve both of these problems, but that’s not
the case. To see that, let’s look at iterative implementations of both of these
functions.

void displayListForwardsIterative(listPtr head) {
   for (listPtr current = head; current != NULL; current = current->next)
        cout << current->data << "\n";
}
void displayListBackwardsIterative(listPtr head) {
   stack<listPtr> nodes;
   for (listPtr current = head; current != NULL; current = current->next)
        nodes.push(current);
   while (!nodes.empty()) {
      nodePtr current = nodes.top();
      nodes.pop();
      cout << current->data << "\n";
    }
}

     The function to display the list in order is nothing more than a straight-
forward traversal loop , such as those we saw back in Chapter 4. The function
to display the list in reverse order, though, is more complicated. It suffers
from the same requirement for a “breadcrumb trail” as our binary tree prob-
lems. Displaying the nodes in a linked list in reverse order requires returning
to prior nodes by definition. In a singly linked list, there’s no way to do that
using the list itself, so a second structure is required. In this case, we need
another stack. After declaring the stack , we push all of the nodes in our
linked list onto the stack using a for loop . Because this is a stack, where
each item is added on top of previous items, the first item in the linked list
will be on the bottom of the stack, and the last item in the linked list will be
on the top. We enter a while loop that continues until the stack is empty ,
repeatedly grabbing a pointer to the top node on the stack , removing that
node pointer from the stack , and then displaying the data in the refer-
enced node . Because the data on the top is the last data in the linked list,
this has the effect of displaying the data in the linked list in reverse order.
     As with the iterative binary tree function shown earlier, it would be pos-
sible to write this function without using a stack (by building a second list
within the function that is a reverse of the original). There is no way, how-
ever, to make the second function as simple as the first or to avoid effectively
traversing two structures instead of one. Comparing the recursive and itera-
tive implementations, it’s easy to see that the iterative “forward” function is
so simple that there is no practical advantage in employing recursion, and
there are several practical disadvantages. In contrast, the recursive “back-
ward” function is simpler than the iterative version and should be expected
to perform approximately as well as the iterative version. Therefore, the
“backward” function is a reasonable use of recursion, while the “forward”
function, though a good recursive programming exercise, is not a good
practical use of recursion.

                     Think Like a Programmer      S ol v i n g P ro b l e ms w i t h R e cu rs i o n   169
                      ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
      Exercises
                   As always, trying out the ideas presented in the chapter is imperative!
          6-1.     Write a function to compute the sum of just the positive numbers in an array
                   of integers. First, solve the problem using iteration. Then, using the technique
                   shown in this chapter, convert your iterative function to a recursive function.
          6-2.     Consider an array representing a binary string, where every element’s data
                   value is 0 or 1. Write a bool function to determine whether the binary string
                   has odd parity (an odd number of 1 bits). Hint: Remember that the recursive
                   function is going to return true (odd) or false (even), not the count of 1 bits.
                   Solve the problem first using iteration, then recursion.
          6-3.     Write a function that is passed an array of integers and a “target” number
                   and that returns the number of occurrences of the target in the array. Solve
                   the problem first using iteration, then recursion.
          6-4.     Design your own: Find a problem processing a one-dimension array that you
                   have already solved or that is trivial for you at your current skill level, and
                   solve the problem (or solve it again) using recursion.
          6-5.     Solve exercise 6-1 again, using a linked list instead of an array.
          6-6.     Solve exercise 6-2 again, using a linked list instead of an array.
          6-7.     Solve exercise 6-3 again, using a linked list instead of an array.
          6-8.     Design your own: Try to discover a linked-list processing problem that is
                   difficult to solve using iteration but can be solved directly using recursion.
          6-9.     Some words in programming have more than one common meaning. In
                   Chapter 4, we learned about the heap, from which we get memory allocated
                   with new. The term heap also describes a binary tree in which each node value
                   is higher than any in the left or right subtree. Write a recursive function to
                   determine whether a binary tree is a heap.
          6-10.    A binary search tree is a binary tree in which each node value is greater than
                   any value in that node’s left subtree but less than any value in the node’s
                   right subtree. Write a recursive function to determine whether a binary tree
                   is a binary search tree.
          6-11.    Write a recursive function that is passed a binary search tree’s root pointer and
                   a new value to be inserted and that creates a new node with the new value,
                   placing it in the correct location to maintain the binary search tree structure.
                   Hint: Consider making the root pointer parameter a reference parameter.
          6-12.    Design your own: Consider basic statistical questions you can ask of a set of
                   numerical values, such as average, median, mode, and so forth. Attempt to
                   write recursive functions to compute those statistics for a binary tree of integers.
                   Some are easier to write than others. Why?




170    Chapter 6                         Think Like a Programmer
                                          ©2012, V. Anton Spraul
