                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann




                       4. Try Shortcuts
                                         How?  Based on your experience, you can make educated guesses
                                         about which areas of your program’s source relate to your bug’s symp-
                                         toms. You can also check systems that have repeatedly had bugs and
                                         confirm they’re not at fault, initially ignoring the ones with responsibili-
                                         ties that probably don’t relate to your particular problem.
                                         Why?  Once you know you need to jump to a specific point in your
                                         program’s sources, getting there doesn’t take much time: With most
                                         integrated development environments or editors, it takes only a
                                         moment to jump from line 20 to line 10,438 in a file. One method of
                                         identifying the part you need is narrowing down the target area by
                                         ruling out larger sections. If you can disregard most of the program’s
                                         sources, you’ll have a better idea of where to look for your target line.
                                         The presented shortcuts can work either way: discovering that a system
                                         is related to your bug or ruling it out.
                                     Shortcuts are alluring. It’s difficult to resist skipping all the hard work and
                                     getting a task done a lot quicker than your team would typically expect.
                                     However, you must be careful not to fall into the trap of repeatedly trying
                                     to find shortcuts without making any progress. Likewise, it’s easy to get too
                                     focused on one where the line of inquiry doesn’t lead to the spot that’s at
                                     fault. If shortcuts don’t quickly get you where you need to go, they slow you
                                     down because they keep you from beginning detailed investigations. In the
                                     worst case, you’re mistaken and spend time looking into a supposed lead
                                     that turns out to be a dead end.
                                          Throughout your work, keep checking to make sure you’re on the
                                     right track. Does the spot you found via a shortcut really fit the bug
                                     you’re working on? Is it reasonable to conclude that this code area is
                                     related to the observed symptoms? Or might this code be unrelated,
                                     meaning you can rule out this area as the source of the problem? Make
                                     sure to stay focused.
-1—
 0—
+1—
                 42      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 42                                                                                   13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann




                                                IN PR AC TICE: AVOID UNLIKELY CULPRIT S

                                    On one project, my colleague was working on a bug related to network com-
                                    munication: Something was going wrong with our HTTP requests. The project
                                    used curl, a library that implements several network protocols. My colleague
                                    followed the bug’s traces and spent a lot of time trying to debug curl itself
                                    because that seemed like the logical source of the problem.
                                         However, libraries like curl have been developed over numerous years,
                                    creating highly optimized, complex code that can be hard to read and under-
                                    stand if you haven’t dealt with it before. Ultimately, it’s more likely that the bug
                                    is somewhere in the usage of the library rather than in the library itself. Indeed,
                                    my colleague’s bug turned out to be hiding in our code.



                                   Using shortcuts isn’t always simple; it may even be impossible. It
                               requires some experience with software development in general and with
                               the current project. The more experience and knowledge you gather in
                               both areas, the more valuable this strategy will be.
                                   If you can’t nail the spot responsible for your bug by using shortcuts,
                               you can still learn something from where they take you. You can ignore
                               unrelated areas during the remainder of your investigation and employ
                               other strategies on vaguely related systems. For example, if you find a func-
                               tion somehow related to the bug, you can use a debugger to put a break-
                               point in it and drill down further from there (see “Debug the Code” on
                               page XX).
                                   The following sections introduce several possible shortcut methods.
                               They may very well fall short, but if they’re successful, they’ll let you jump
                               directly to the right point without any deeper investigation.

                               Make Educated Guesses
                               You might start by making an educated guess about the problem’s location.
                               In a perfect situation, you would have encountered this exact bug before,
                               but you can’t rely on that every time. However, if you’re familiar with the
                               code base, this particular kind of bug, or debugging in general, you may
                               be able to make a confident guess. The following sections outline several
                               sources of experience.

                               A Particular Program
                               If you’ve worked on a specific program for a long time, you’ll get to
                               know its idiosyncrasies and how it reacts to certain kinds of bugs. You
                               may be able to determine a bug’s root cause and location from its symp-
                               toms alone. This is more likely with bugs similar to those you’ve worked
                               on before, but it’s also possible for bugs that interact with systems
                               you know.                                                                                                       —-1
                                                                                                                                               —0
                                                                                                                                               —+1
                                                                                                                   Probe   43




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 43                                                                                                 13/05/26 10:10 PM
                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                                          Understanding the program’s overall architecture can provide infor-
                                     mation about how it works in general. Once you start investigating a bug
                                     and getting to know its surroundings, connected systems, and related func-
                                     tionality, you’ll begin building a mental model of its context, which makes
                                     it easier for you to navigate the program’s sources and get to any relevant
                                     point quicker.
                                          Knowing fundamental decisions from the program’s development
                                     and details about its technical debt also provides insight into approach-
                                     ing a bug. If you’re familiar with the program’s long-lasting temporary
                                     workarounds or hacky solutions to previous bugs, you have some great
                                     starting points to investigate because you have good reason to be suspi-
                                     cious of them.



                                                 IN PR AC TICE: QUES TION YOUR A SSUMP TIONS

                                         I once had to fix a seemingly simple bug in a tool my organization used inter-
                                         nally. The program wasn’t super complex, the bug report was very clear, and
                                         the requested change didn’t seem outrageously complicated. When I started
                                         debugging the tool, however, none of the breakpoints I had previously set up
                                         seemed to do anything.
                                               Then I started investigating my development setup. Surely something must
                                         have been wrong with the IDE, or maybe I was using the wrong build configu-
                                         ration without debugging information? I spent a lot of time checking everything
                                         around the program, but I couldn’t find any problems.
                                               Eventually, I took a step back and examined what the program did during
                                         its launch. I discovered that the initial launch executable didn’t do much. It just
                                         checked whether an update was available and then launched a different execut-
                                         able, which I wasn’t debugging. This piece allowed me to simply launch the
                                         other executable and start work. From then on, I was a lot quicker at fixing
                                         bugs in this tool.




                                     Common Functionality
                                     In addition to knowing a particular program, if you’ve worked on similar
                                     functionality before, you probably know how it can break. For example,
                                     you might know what can cut off sounds, why GUI elements may not adjust
                                     properly when resizing a window, or why a command line tool might mis-
                                     interpret a filepath with spaces in it. When a bug occurs in a comparable
                                     functionality, you probably have at least an inkling of what’s going on and
                                     where to start looking, even if you don’t have a solution ready. This experi-
                                     ence gives you an advantage across different projects.

-1—
 0—
+1—
                 44      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 44                                                                                               13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann




                                                    IN PR AC TICE: DERI V E LE ADS FROM
                                                            INCORREC T BEHAV IOR

                                    Whenever I see a blank space, the outline of a box, or even a box with a ques-
                                    tion mark inside replacing a character in the middle of text, I have a good idea
                                    about what’s going on. Because I’ve seen this problem several times already,
                                    whether I’m working on a web application, desktop GUI software, or a 3D
                                    program that uses a bespoke implementation to render text, I know two facts
                                    for sure. First, that character must be out of the ordinary—that is, not ASCII.
                                    Second, the font used for rendering must not support the character. In addition,
                                    the function decoding the text might not handle special characters correctly. All
                                    this provides me with multiple avenues of investigation, one of which will likely
                                    lead to the bug’s root cause.



                                   Lots of functionality is based on the same ideas and implementa-
                               tion principles. Ultimately, if a piece of code fulfills the same purpose as
                               another, it likely works similarly. The details contain many differences, but
                               similar functionality can lead to similar bugs.

                               Popular Frameworks
                               You can apply your experience with popular frameworks across mul-
                               tiple projects. Frameworks like Electron, React.js, and WinForms make
                               developers’ lives easier because they provide a basis to build programs.
                               Knowing a program’s framework tells you what kind of restrictions it
                               imposes. It may also familiarize you with potential usage pitfalls that can
                               lead to bugs, how bugs manifest with the framework present and what
                               tools it offers to track them down, and the framework’s own weaknesses
                               and how to avoid them. If you can’t avoid these problems, you may want to
                               put them on your list of suspicious systems to investigate first whenever a
                               bug is reported.
                                    The significant differences in how frameworks are developed may influ-
                               ence how you approach a bug inside or connected to one. With the source
                               code available to you, you can closely analyze it to determine why some-
                               thing breaks. If the framework developer doesn’t share the source, it’ll be
                               impossible to fix a bug directly, but you can still use your knowledge to work
                               around such an issue or ask the developer for a fix.
                                    A company may develop bespoke frameworks to use internally and
                               share across multiple projects. While knowing about those is of limited
                               use at other organizations, you can use your experience when transfer-
                               ring internally. You may also be able to apply concepts you’ve learned from
                               bespoke frameworks to others because their implementation may be similar
                               if the functionality is comparable.
                                                                                                                                            —-1
                                                                                                                                            —0
                                                                                                                                            —+1
                                                                                                                Probe   45




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 45                                                                                              13/05/26 10:10 PM
                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann




                                     Foundational APIs
                                     Programs and frameworks with similar purposes are written in similar ways
                                     partly because their systems must interact with the same foundational APIs.
                                     Knowing these APIs and their potential problems allows you to avoid, iden-
                                     tify, and fix related bugs.
                                           A program must interact with the same operating systems for input
                                     handling, window creation, multi-threading, and so on. It most likely uses
                                     the programming language’s standard library for all kinds of purposes,
                                     such as containers, networking, and file access. If the software uses a
                                     database, it must interact with a well-established implementation such as
                                     InfluxDB, MongoDB, MySQL, or PostgreSQL. Programs that support ren-
                                     dering 3D scenes must use a graphics API like Direct3D or Vulkan.
                                           While frameworks often abstract away the interaction with foundational
                                     APIs, their peculiarities and limitations can still leak through, exposing you to
                                     the same behavior and properties—and potentially the same bugs. If an API
                                     has particular challenges, developers will likely make the same mistakes or
                                     overlook the same unexpected activity when implementing the code that uses
                                     it. Complex pre- and post-conditions may also make an API really difficult.



                                                 IN PR AC TICE: BE WARE OF AMBIGUOUS NAMES

                                         A platform I once worked on offered an API to play audio samples. The func-
                                         tion in question had the following signature:

                                         void play_samples(void* data, size_t length, size_t sample_bits)

                                              I expected the second parameter to specify the length of the data in bytes,
                                         which I happily provided. The result was an audio track that sounded good for
                                         a while but had a lot of noise toward the end.
                                              It turned out that the API actually required me to provide the number of
                                         samples for the second parameter. While the number of samples relates to size
                                         in bytes, it’s not the same in most cases. For a 16-bit sample, the size in bytes
                                         would be 2, but the sample count would be 1. That’s why the audio initially
                                         sounded fine, then played noise for the same duration. Admittedly, the docu-
                                         mentation probably specified that length must be the sample count, but looking
                                         at the function’s signature made it easy to jump to the wrong conclusion.
                                              The next time I work on this platform and encounter a bug related to audio
                                         playback, I’ll check this particular function first. Learning about an easily mis-
                                         used function like this one makes it easier to fix similar bugs in the future.




                                     Common Patterns
                                     In addition to programs being influenced by their interaction with
-1—
                                     common APIs, many have similar functionality, which leads to shared
 0—
+1—
                 46      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 46                                                                                              13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                               implementation patterns. (Some books even catalog and proliferate those
                               designs.) Even if you don’t intentionally use specific patterns, your archi-
                               tectural decisions are likely influenced by other software you’ve seen, the
                               source code you’ve read, and any code you’ve written. Ultimately, you can
                               match any designs you’ve seen before, especially those you’ve used, with
                               your mental model to quickly understand a particular implementation.
                               You’ll also know some of the pattern’s shortcomings and potential pitfalls
                               that may cause bugs.
                                    For example, the model-view-controller (MVC) pattern divides responsibili-
                               ties based on the data, its display, and the logic applied to it. Most programs
                               that have the terms model, view, and controller in the code use this design.
                               Knowing that means you have a general idea of how the code is built and
                               which bugs can potentially hide around its use, such as the way its relatively
                               static dependency chain can make updating the view inefficient. That
                               makes it a lot easier to find an entry point in the code for a bug where the
                               view always lags.



                                        IN PR AC TICE: MIND INS TANTANEOUS INPU T E V ENT S

                                    I’ve often had to deal with missing user input, but that problem isn’t based on a
                                    popular pattern. It comes from low-level input handling interfaces, which work
                                    in one of two ways. Either the program polls for the state of the relevant keys
                                    and sensors or it listens to events that the operating system generates. Bugs that
                                    lose input must be connected to misusing one of these paradigms and usually
                                    result from brief holding time or quick repetition.
                                          If the code polls the input state periodically, it’s likely to miss actions that
                                    don’t last long enough or fail to capture state changes that occur between two
                                    polls. If the program listens to events, the implementation likely handles only
                                    one per button per update tick and ignores the rest.
                                          If your program misses input and you know these two likely causes, you’ll
                                    quickly track down the source because you only have to look in two places.
                                    From there, you can further investigate the reason and possible solutions.




                               General Software Development
                               Even if you don’t have experience with the particular type of program you’re
                               working on, relevant frameworks, or other related technologies, you can still
                               apply your experience from general software development to the problem
                               at hand. For example, if an application freezes, it’s highly likely to be related
                               to a deadlock or an infinite loop. If you go through the code to look at all
                               the mutexes, you may very well find the culprit (possibly with the help of a
                               debugger). Alternatively, check all your loops’ conditions and make sure they
                               always end. If a program can’t write to a file, you know the hard disk may be                                     —-1
                               full or the particular file may be read-only, so you can check that first.                                        —0
                                                                                                                                                 —+1
                                                                                                                     Probe   47




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 47                                                                                                   13/05/26 10:10 PM
                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                                         Even if you lack software development experience altogether, you may
                                     have some other expertise you can apply. Try treating the program as a
                                     black box and observing which inputs cause which issues. These can be any-
                                     thing that influences the program’s execution, such as pressing a button,
                                     changing a configuration file, or swapping out hardware. Any information
                                     about ways to affect the bug lets you make better guesses about its cause.

                                     Focus on Suspicious Systems
                                     Another way to guess where a bug might come from is to investigate suspi-
                                     cious systems. Look for those that have contained multiple bugs before or
                                     that are hard to implement without making mistakes.

                                     Check Challenging Systems
                                     Three kinds of systems tend to regularly have bugs across different pro-
                                     grams: those that are poorly understood, those that are complex, or those
                                     that are used in many different environments.
                                          Poorly understood systems break because the requirements for pre-
                                     and post-conditions aren’t precise. A programmer is likely to improvise
                                     when a system is underspecified, producing code that may not align with
                                     the program’s general direction or may have problems with usability
                                     or design.
                                          Additionally, poorly understood systems often sit between others. If
                                     multiple systems interact, you must understand how all of them behave,
                                     as well as the requirements for calling into them. For example, a system
                                     that connects multi-threaded data processing with the GUI must con-
                                     sider how and when the data processing is ready to accept new inputs and
                                     when it can deliver results that the GUI can display. It must also account
                                     for processing time, sustained interactivity, and the results of errors or
                                     user cancellation.
                                          Very complex systems deal with challenging functionality implemen-
                                     tation like network communication, which is hard to get right because it
                                     involves a lot of complex pre-conditions for calling each networking func-
                                     tion, all results arrive asynchronously, and latency issues arise. If the sys-
                                     tem sits between a platform’s networking API and a program that needs a
                                     synchronous interface to get information from some server, these different
                                     requirements can cause alignment issues.
                                          Foundational systems also tend to exhibit more bugs than decoupled
                                     ones, primarily because people use them more often and in different ways.
                                     Consider task schedulers that facilitate multi-threading. Most other sys-
                                     tems run through them to parallelize computation, handle dependencies
                                     between tasks, and prioritize more urgent work. Just one minor mistake can
                                     cause serious bugs in higher-level systems.
                                          One clue that a system’s implementation was difficult is heavily com-
                                     mented source code or externals with extensive documentation. If the
                                     original programmer thought it necessary to write more about a particular
-1—                                  system than the rest of the program, it could signal a higher potential for
 0—
+1—
                 48      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 48                                                                                 13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                               bugs. Read comments and documentation carefully because they may give
                               you an indication of what aspects were difficult and where you should focus
                               your search.

                               Check Repeatedly Broken Systems
                               If multiple bugs have occurred in a system, there will likely be others, which
                               may be very similar because they stem from the same underlying cause or
                               misunderstanding. When facing a new bug, there are better odds that it lies
                               in a system that had many others before.
                                    Fixing previously existing bugs in a system also increases the probabil-
                               ity of creating more because you’re making changes on top of the original
                               implementation. Unless you’re the system’s original developer, you won’t
                               know every detail about it, its dependencies, and its requirements. This
                               limited understanding may lead you to a Band-Aid solution that will later
                               turn into another bug. Even the original developers may have forgotten a
                               system’s intricacies after a long time away. The more a system grows and
                               changes over time, and the more developers touch it, the more likely it will
                               be a breeding ground for bugs. While this isn’t true in all cases, a system
                               that shows many problems is likely to become such a hotspot. It would be
                               wise to address this in the long run, but for now, the goal is just to find an
                               entry point for further investigation.
                                    If you’ve been working on several bugs for a system, you’ve probably
                               started to build a bit of knowledge about it even if you’re not the original
                               developer. Armed with this information, you can more easily attribute
                               bugs to this system and pinpoint them to a particular spot in the code.
                               Additionally, it should be increasingly straightforward for you to fix bugs in
                               this context. A pattern might emerge over time and point you in the direc-
                               tion of the actual underlying problem.

                      NOTE     There are many reasons why a developer could make a mistake that leads to a bug,
                               including inexperience with the subject matter and deadline pressure. Alternatively,
                               the system may originally have been created for a specific use case and inappropriately
                               repurposed or implemented as a prototype without anyone producing a proper ship-
                               pable version. Whatever the reason, assigning blame is never helpful; it’s better to
                               work constructively and improve the system.

                               Initially Ignore Irrelevant Systems
                               In addition to making educated guesses about the likely source of the bug,
                               it’s also useful to rule out areas that you don’t need to investigate. The bug’s
                               behavior should provide hints about what is or isn’t relevant. Start with the
                               seemingly relevant systems and only work outward if you don’t find an entry
                               point there.

                               Look for Relevant Responsibilities
                               Understanding the responsibilities of the systems in your program and
                                                                                                                                        —-1
                               framework can help you determine which systems are likely not related to
                                                                                                                                        —0
                                                                                                                                        —+1
                                                                                                            Probe   49




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 49                                                                                          13/05/26 10:10 PM
                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                                     your bug. These usually deal with distinct aspects of the program and don’t
                                     communicate with the functions most likely involved.
                                          Efficiency in bug investigations is one reason why programmers should
                                     strive for separation of concerns and decoupling between the various sys-
                                     tems that make up a program. When a system’s responsibilities are clearly
                                     defined, it’s easy to tell what functionality it offers and whether that may
                                     be involved with your bug. Additionally, if two systems have clear
                                     boundaries and interact only when required, you can more easily follow
                                     dependency chains.
                                          Systems that take care of different aspects of your program are usu-
                                     ally independent. For example, your GUI system probably doesn’t directly
                                     communicate with the audio system or the networking layer, and the
                                     audio likely doesn’t directly interact with the networking. Animations are
                                     likewise independent of any databases your program might interact with.
                                     Intermediate systems may couple these different systems to drive function-
                                     ality, but they shouldn’t communicate directly.



                                             IN PR AC TICE: FOCUS ON THE MOS T LIKELY CULPRIT

                                         While working on a larger application, I encountered a problem: Not all com-
                                         mand line parameters were parsed correctly. Because the architecture of this
                                         program was relatively well constructed and the task of parsing parameters
                                         didn’t depend on a lot of other functionality, I was able to ignore many irrel-
                                         evant systems (input handling, GUI, audio, and so on).
                                               I started by investigating how the main() function parsed the parameters
                                         it received from the operating system, using a small system composed of two
                                         files. Everything related to strings, containers, and locales also became part of
                                         my scrutiny. For example, I thought the logging system might have had an unin-
                                         tended side effect on the strings it was supposed to log, so I kept it in the back
                                         of my mind as I worked.
                                               Ultimately, I discovered that the system responsible for parsing parameters
                                         wasn’t handling positional parameters correctly. I was happy I hadn’t wasted
                                         my time examining the program’s many unrelated systems.



                                          Of course, one or more of the systems you’ve deemed irrelevant may
                                     turn out to be relevant after all. Some systems are connected in surpris-
                                     ing ways, influencing each other thanks to unfortunate design decisions,
                                     required dependencies that aren’t immediately apparent, or shortcuts
                                     developers took when implementing them. All programs are unique and
                                     may have special requirements that lead to uncommon and potentially
                                     surprising relationships. For example, the audio system may pull sample
                                     data directly out of a database, the networking layer may write statistics
                                     straight to the GUI, or a 3D renderer may request texture data from
-1—                                  files directly.
 0—
+1—
                 50      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 50                                                                                              13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann




                               Consider Surprising Dependencies
                               Bugs can also create relationships between systems that don’t have any
                               intentional connection. For example, memory corruption caused by one
                               system usually affects others, changing data to random values in random
                               locations. This can suddenly link two systems that shouldn’t logically have
                               anything to do with each other.
                                    Memory corruption can come from multiple factors, such as race condi-
                               tions, bad pointers, or external sources like files or devices. When it occurs,
                               your program likely won’t behave the same every time you run it. A specific
                               type of corruption in a specific place may trigger one bug, while the same
                               problem in another memory location may create a different bug or may not
                               cause problems at all. (For identifying and removing sources of random-
                               ness, see “Remove Randomness” on page XX.)
                                    Another relatively common reason for independent systems to become
                               connected is the use of generic, foundational features. These might include
                               task schedulers, threading primitives,random number generators, or file
                               access functions. Problems with or misuse of these elements may affect mul-
                               tiple other systems, since they may depend on the same low-level functions.



                                           IN PR AC TICE: CHOOSE YOUR R ANDOM NUMBER
                                                           GENER ATOR CAREF ULLY

                                    If two systems need to generate a random number, each system’s sequence
                                    should always be independent of the other’s. However, if you rely on the good
                                    old C function rand() , you’ll notice that it uses some internal state to generate
                                    the next random number, linking any two systems that use this function. Instead,
                                    you should choose a random number generator that allows you to pass in the
                                    state. Some libraries provide rand_r(unsigned int*) for this purpose. Another
                                    alternative is to use C++’s generators from the random header file.




                               Know When to Change Your Strategy
                               As noted earlier, don’t spend too long trying out shortcuts. If they don’t
                               quickly guide you to the right spot, try other strategies that may take longer
                               but won’t lead you to a dead end. As a rule of thumb, you shouldn’t spend
                               more than an hour on shortcuts, and usually you’ll need less time because
                               your list of guesses and relevant systems tends to be short. It may take a bit
                               longer if you’re dealing with a large program that features many potentially
                               relevant systems.
                                   While shortcuts can reveal some information about your bug, they
                               may not provide details about its root cause or potential fixes. In that case,
                               take your knowledge and move on to other strategies. You should try other
                               approaches after probing with two or three shortcuts, or when you feel your                                   —-1
                                                                                                                                             —0
                                                                                                                                             —+1
                                                                                                                 Probe   51




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 51                                                                                               13/05/26 10:10 PM
                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                                     guesses become desperate instead of based on your experience. Remember
                                     that you can now cross any system you have investigated with shortcuts off
                                     your list of possible culprits.


                       5. Search the Internet
                                         How?  You can use your favorite search engine to seek information
                                         related to your bug or try your luck on specialized websites that may
                                         offer more applicable content. Don’t forget to search your organiza-
                                         tion’s intranet for documentation or discussion about your program.
                                         Why?  If you’re lucky, someone else will have encountered an identi-
                                         cal or similar bug before and may have more information than you’ve
                                         found so far. They might even have posted the solution, which you can
                                         adapt for your own purposes. Simply finding more about similar issues
                                         or other people’s approaches may give you hints or new ideas.




                                                  IN PR AC TICE: FIND SOLU TIONS TO COMPLE X
                                                                      ISSUES QUICKLY

                                         While working on a little tool designed to send network messages to a larger
                                         program, I pulled in a tiny library to help send HTTP requests. This library con-
                                         sisted of precisely one header file. However, after including that file and begin-
                                         ning to build my project, I got the following compilation error:

                                         error C2011: 'sockaddr': 'struct' type redefinition

                                               It looked like a complex problem that would have taken me down a rab-
                                         bit hole as I followed type definitions in several header files. Before going that
                                         route, however, I put the error message into Google and quickly found the most
                                         likely cause: You must include winsock2.h before winsock.h if you’re using both.
                                         Indeed, just adding an #include <winsock2.h> at the top of my code fixed the
                                         problem.



                                     Searching for existing solutions or hints is especially helpful for technolo-
                                     gies many people use. Programming languages, tools, services, libraries,
                                     frameworks, engines, middleware, SDKs, and APIs may have caused others
                                     to run into issues like yours. The more users something has, the more likely
                                     you’ll find relevant results online.
                                         Solutions to the problem you’re trying to solve can come in many
                                     shapes. You may find information on how to express something in the pro-
                                     gramming language you’re using, a hint about how to get to a specific com-
                                     mand or option in a tool, a new binary build of an SDK, or code you can
-1—                                  integrate into your own code base or that of a third-party library.
 0—
+1—
                 52      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 52                                                                                              13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                                    Internet searches often lead to places that let you ask others for help,
                               like forums, question-and-answer sites, or even social media communities.
                               Do your own research first, but if you can’t find any useful information,
                               consider asking others (see “Ask for Help” on page XX). This way, you
                               can get the information you need while contributing to building a shared
                               knowledge base on the internet so that others benefit from questions you’ve
                               asked or solutions you’ve posted.

                               Don’t Scroll Too Far
                               The biggest problem with searching the internet is that it contains a huge
                               amount of information. If you’re not dealing with obscure topics or using
                               precise search terms, you could end up with hundreds of millions of hits.
                               Don’t waste time sifting through all of them manually.
                                    It’s rare to find anything relevant past the second page of search results,
                               so after the first 30 to 50 entries, go back to your terms and options. You
                               should also try a different search engine, ideally one more specialized in
                               the topic you’re investigating. If you’ve already done so, you’re probably out
                               of luck and need to turn to a different strategy.

                               Choose a Search Engine
                               While the landscape of search engines shifts occasionally, Google has been
                               the most widely used general-purpose option for years. Competitors such as
                               Bing and DuckDuckGo, serve the same needs and you can mostly use them
                               interchangeably. Because searching the internet involves minimal effort,
                               it’s best to start with the broadest and most generic engine available. Start
                               with the likes of Google, then try a relatively generic software development
                               knowledge base such as Stack Overflow. Depending on your bug’s topic,
                               even Wikipedia may be useful if you need to look up some formula, algo-
                               rithm, or other fact. While generic searches also include these sites, going
                               directly to the source may give you better results. You can then move on to
                               more specialized websites for the general technology you’re working with.
                               For example, you can try the Mozilla Developer Network (https://developer
                               .mozilla.org) for anything related to web technologies. If you’re working with
                               Microsoft technologies, you may want to try Microsoft Docs (https://learn
                               .microsoft.com/en-us/docs).
                                     An answer to your problem could exist on social media, but it may be
                               difficult to find in the overwhelming mass of information. General-purpose
                               search engines often don’t index social media data fully or at all, so a dedi-
                               cated search on social sites may reveal information you can’t find otherwise.
                               Try websites like Hacker News (https://news.ycombinator.com), Mastodon,
                               Reddit, X (formerly known as Twitter), or YouTube. Their community
                               approach may help you discover highly relevant content.
                                     You can also look for even more specialized sites by using a regular
                               search engine for terms like web development discord or consulting the official
                               documentation for non-public sources of knowledge. One of your first stops
                               should be the list of frequently asked questions.                                                  —-1
                                                                                                                                  —0
                                                                                                                                  —+1
                                                                                                      Probe   53




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 53                                                                                    13/05/26 10:10 PM
                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                                         Keep in mind that not all websites are publicly available. Normal search
                                     engines may not index some of them, and some may require dedicated
                                     accounts to access, particularly if they deal with licensed technology or plat-
                                     forms. If you can make it over this threshold, these communities provide
                                     valuable content from experienced users and developers.
                                         A single technology will generally have some or all of the following
                                     services:
                                         Bug trackers and feedback systems   Repositories that list known bugs
                                         and their status. In some cases, they include more general feedback and
                                         discussions from which you can gather additional information.
                                         Chat servers  Spaces for transient impromptu discussion. Some of
                                         these, including Discord and Slack, still offer search functionality.
                                         Documentation and knowledge bases   Official documentation for
                                         the given technology. These services also provide discussion or editing
                                         functionality.
                                         Forums  Asynchronous spaces where people can read and reply to
                                         content threads. This classic form of online discussion can offer a great
                                         deal of information.
                                         Public roadmaps  An overview of upcoming updates, features, and
                                         bug fixes. Roadmaps are more useful if they incorporate discussion and
                                         voting.
                                         Support systems   Like bug trackers and forums, but with more focus
                                         on community-supported solutions. Each resembles a version of Stack
                                         Overflow dedicated to a specific technology.
                                         Compared to general searches, specialized services contain fewer seem-
                                     ingly useful answers that later turn out to be irrelevant. The answers them-
                                     selves are also likely to be of higher quality, allowing you to use them more
                                     directly instead of deriving a solution specific to your situation.

                                     Use Advanced Search Engine Features
                                     No matter what service you’re using, first try a very straightforward search
                                     with the terms you’re looking for. For example, you could look for an error
                                     message or a crude description such as C# disable button. If that gives you
                                     irrelevant results or too much information to sort through, start narrowing
                                     down your results with the engine’s advanced features.
                                          Sorting options alone might get what you’re looking for to float to the
                                     top of the list. You could sort by relevance (as the algorithm rates it), time
                                     of creation, time of the latest comment, and so on. If you’re looking for
                                     something older, like information about a bug that existed only in previous
                                     versions of a library, it’s beneficial to tweak these settings. Filters are also
                                     tremendously useful when it comes to reducing the number of results. You
                                     may be able to limit your search to a certain section or topic.
                                          Filtering and sorting don’t always have convenient user interfaces, so
-1—                                  you might need to use operators in the string itself. If you have trouble find-
 0—                                  ing what you’re looking for, look into which operators your search engine
+1—
                 54      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 54                                                                                   13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                               supports. Here are some useful operators for Google in particular, most of
                               which can also be used in competing engines either verbatim or with little
                               adjustment:
                                    -term  Exclude results containing term.
                                    “term”  Ensure that term actually occurs in the results in this form. It
                                    also allows forcing the search engine to list only results where multiple
                                    terms appear in the correct order, like “term1 term2”.
                                    term1 * term2  Match any words or phrases between the two terms.
                                    term1 AND term2  Make sure both terms occur in the results.
                                    term1 OR term2  Allow results that contain one of the two terms.
                                    filetype:pdf  Only show results from PDF files.
                                    site:example.com  Only show results from the given website.
                                    intitle:term  Show results with the given term in the title.
                                    inurl:term  Show results with the given term in the URL.
                                    before:YYYY-MM-DD  Search for results from before the given date.
                                    after:YYYY-MM-DD  Search for results from after the given date.
                                    Be careful to avoid including a space character after operators with a
                               colon or hyphen.
                                    The two most essential operators are -term and “term”. Excluding a word
                               or forcing the results to include one can do wonders. For example, when
                               searching for information related to the Rust programming language, it’s
                               helpful to exclude references to the game of the same name: rust -game.



                                                IN PR AC TICE: USE QUOTES TO GE T MORE
                                                               CONCRE TE RESULT S

                                    I once needed to find a file called px.cpp that I knew had been previously
                                    available online. Just searching for px.cpp didn’t get me the right results, but
                                    when I entered “px.cpp” into the search bar, the file appeared on the first page.
                                    Similarly, when a dialog box says, The error code is 2810., searching for “The
                                    error code is 2810.” yields more relevant results than if you leave out the quotes.



                                    Remember that your code may concatenate strings from several par-
                               tial strings before showing them to you, which means searching for the
                               whole string won’t yield any results (see “Search in All Files” on page XX).
                               Any concrete numbers, times, values, or general data from your specific
                               instance of the program will most likely have been inserted into the text
                               before being printed to the log, written to a file, or displayed on the screen.
                               Search for partial strings only and consider using the * operator to let any
                               value be present.                                                                                              —-1
                                                                                                                                              —0
                                                                                                                                              —+1
                                                                                                                  Probe   55




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 55                                                                                                13/05/26 10:10 PM
                                   The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann




                                     Search for Source Code
                                     Searching for source code is tricky no matter what engine you use. Many
                                     special characters in code either don’t show up in regular text or structure
                                     that text without carrying any real meaning themselves. Because search
                                     engines primarily target regular users trying to find text that isn’t code,
                                     they ignore those characters. They also don’t generally index popular pub-
                                     lic code repositories: While it’s easy to find individual users, organizations,
                                     and projects on GitHub, you don’t get results for all the code it hosts.
                                          If you really need to find source code, you must go directly to the
                                     source, no pun intended. GitHub has a great feature (https://github.com/
                                     search) that allows searching through all code it hosts with powerful options
                                     and filters. While not all online services that host code offer search over
                                     all repositories, they typically provide some way to search through specific
                                     ones. Find a relevant repository using a regular search engine, then use
                                     a specialized query to go through the code. You can also clone an open
                                     source repository and search using offline tools if the online options don’t
                                     help (see “Search in All Files” on page XX).
                                          Technologies with generic names make the searching process even
                                     harder, especially when they’re new. Here are some examples at time of
                                     writing:
                                         Go  Could mean anything even combined with other terms. As a work-
                                         around, search for "golang".
                                         Metal  May yield irrelevant results despite the combination. Searching
                                         "metal api" can help.
                                         Rust  Can be confused with oxidized metal or the game of the same
                                         name. Use "rust lang" instead.
                                         Swift  A generic term that also has many other specialized uses (for
                                         example, in banking or music). Alternative terms are "swift lang" or
                                         "swift apple".


                                     Don’t Forget Your Intranet
                                     While searching the internet, don’t forget its smaller cousin: the intranet.
                                     Try looking through any internal wikis, bug trackers, project management
                                     tools, and so on. Since they aren’t accessible from outside your organiza-
                                     tion, these tools aren’t integrated into any generic search engines. You may
                                     even have to query a couple of separate sites, because it’s not common for
                                     an organization to have an internal search engine covering all the services
                                     making up its intranet.
                                         The results will be much more limited, but any information will be
                                     highly relevant to your use case and more specialized than anything
                                     you can find elsewhere. If a similar bug has occurred before, the docu-
                                     mentation left behind from the previous investigation and fix should be
                                     especially beneficial (see “Track Your Debugging Process” on page XX).
                                     Another advantage of finding a source within your organization is that
-1—                                  the person who has written down the information may still be in the
 0—
+1—
                 56      Part II




      335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 56                                                                                   13/05/26 10:10 PM
                             The Debugging Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 5/18/26 by Johannes Kuhlmann



                               office, allowing you to ask follow-up questions if necessary (see “Ask for
                               Help” on page XX).




                                                                                                                                  —-1
                                                                                                                                  —0
                                                                                                                                  —+1
                                                                                                      Probe   57




335-152500_ch01_1P.indd 57                                                                                    13/05/26 10:10 PM
