                                              H
                                                        1




                                             Hydrogen
                                               1.008




                                          HYDROGEN, H




rocket man
On The Table it sits at the top,

Test tube lit it explodes with a pop!

Most abundant by far,

Power’d rocket, now car?

Less its bonds water’d ne’er be a drop,

And DNA’s double helix would flop!




                                                            1
On The Table it sits at the top,

               THE FIRST ELEMENT OF THE PERIODIC TABLE

               An element is a substance that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by
               ordinary chemical processes and is made of atoms of only one type. Elements are
               the fundamental materials of which all matter is composed.
                      Hydrogen is the simplest of all the elements in that its atoms consist of just
               one proton and one electron. It sits proudly atop the periodic table as element
               number 1. It was also the first element created during the Big Bang at the begin-
               ning of time.
                      Hydrogen gas was known long before it was recognized as an element. As
               far back as the 1500s, the Swiss alchemist Paracelsus (1493–1541) observed that
               bubbles of a flammable gas were produced when he added very fine pieces of
               iron (known as filings) to sulfuric acid (H2SO4). The Irish scientist Robert Boyle
               (1627–1691) spotted the same thing in 1671 when he dissolved iron filings in
               dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl); he called the gas a “factitious air.” It wasn’t until
               1766 that hydrogen was recognized as an element, by the eccentric yet brilliant
               English chemist Henry Cavendish (1731–1810).



Test tube lit it explodes with a pop!

               Hydrogen, as the diatomic molecule H2, is the lightest of all gases. The time-­
               honored laboratory test for detecting its presence is to light it in a test tube, at
               which point it burns so rapidly that it explodes with a satisfying, telltale “pop.”



Most abundant by far,

               Hydrogen is by far the most abundant element in the universe, making up
               approximately three quarters of the universe’s mass. It’s also the element that
               fuels our sun: every second roughly 600 million metric tons of hydrogen are
               converted to helium, accompanied (crucially for us!) by the conversion of around
               5 million metric tons of matter to life-sustaining energy.



Power’d rocket, now car?

               When compressed as a liquid and then reacted with liquid oxygen (O2), hydrogen
               makes an effective rocket fuel.

                                           2H2 + O2 → 2H2O + Energy

                      A space shuttle consumes 1,500,000 L of liquid hydrogen and 500,000 L of
               liquid oxygen during takeoff.



2
                     Meanwhile, back on terra firma, researchers are trying to improve the
              performance of electrochemical fuel cells for general use in pollution-free, hydro-
              gen-powered vehicles (see “Platinum, Pt” on page 226 for more information on
              this topic). These researchers will need to overcome technological challenges in
              terms of fuel cell efficiency and cost, as well as the distribution and storage of
              hydrogen gas. Only then can hydrogen truly be considered a viable alternative to
              hydrocarbon fossil fuels, such as gasoline and diesel in everyday cars.



Less its bonds water’d ne’er be a drop,

And DNA’s double helix would flop!

              A molecule of water (H2O) consists of two atoms of hydrogen chemically bonded
              to one atom of oxygen. The hydrogen atoms of one water molecule can also
              bond to the oxygen atom of another water molecule via a hydrogen bond. Hydro-
              gen bonds are relatively weak at room temperature, meaning they’re forever
              being broken and made between different water molecules. Yet they’re so numer-
              ous they ensure that a collection of water molecules at room temperature will
              take a liquid rather than a gaseous form, as you’d otherwise expect for such
              small, light molecules. In a way, hydrogen bonds provide the essential glue that
              allows water to act as our planet’s life-sustaining liquid.
                     Hydrogen bonds play another life-defining role by maintaining the elegant
              double helix 3D structure of DNA; in this way, they help to orchestrate the genetic
              code within each of our body’s cells.




                                                                                               3
                                                         He
                                                                    2




                                                          Helium
                                                           4.0026




                                                        HELIUM, He




balloon boy
This super-cool element’s a true Big Bang article,

It’s high pitch’d and noble, so inertly hierarchical;

Is becoming more rare,

Still balloons fill the air,

Just avoid its dense core, alpha particle!




4
This super-cool element’s a true Big Bang article,

                THE FIRST MEMBER OF THE GROUP 18 NOBLE GASES

                Helium was one of the three fundamental elements formed during the Big Bang;
                the other two were hydrogen and lithium. Helium has an ultra-low boiling point
                of –269°C, making liquid helium an effective super coolant. This super coolant is
                necessary for superconductors to produce the powerful magnetic fields needed
                for specialist equipment, such as the MRI scanners hospitals use.



It’s high pitch’d and noble, so inertly hierarchical;

                In hierarchical terms, helium sits at the very top of the group of noble gases
                (group 18) on the periodic table. It’s a lighter-than-air and chemically unreactive
                (known as inert) gas. These traits made it perfect for inflating airships and an
                ideal replacement for the flammable hydrogen that was used previously. When
                inhaled, helium makes your voice high pitched and squeaky because the speed of
                sound in helium is three times faster than it is in air.



Is becoming more rare,

Still balloons fill the air,

                Helium is the second most abundant element in the universe, accounting for
                approximately one quarter of its mass. But it’s only the 71st most abundant
                element in Earth’s crust, where it forms during the radioactive decay of ura-
                nium and thorium and is then extracted along with natural gas. Invariably, the
                demand for helium (including its use in buoyant party balloons!) exceeds supply,
                and global reserves of the element are currently decreasing.




                                                                                                 5
Just avoid its dense core, alpha particle!

               When atoms of some large, unstable elements, such as uranium, thorium, radon,
               and polonium, undergo radioactive decay, they break up into fragments. One
               such fragment is a small particle with a dense core that contains just two protons
               and two neutrons. Known as an alpha particle, it’s essentially a helium atom with-
               out its two electrons; in other words, an alpha particle is simply a helium nucleus
               (He2+). Alpha particles are highly reactive and will whizz through the air in search
               of the pair of electrons (2e–) they need to become neutral helium atoms.

                                                 He2+ + 2e– → He

                     Outside the body, these tiny reactive particles pose little threat; yet if they
               somehow manage to get inside your body, they can cause big trouble! To see just
               how much trouble, flip forward to “Polonium, Po” on page 244 and read about
               the case of Alexander Litvinenko.




6
                                                         Li
                                                                   3




                                                         Lithium
                                                           6.94




                                                    LITHIUM, Li




the mini power pack
Li, small and light, the soft metal with mettle!

Keeps much of our mobile-power’d world in good fettle;

In the sea and the soil,

Floats on water and oil,

Has often helped many’s the troubled mind settle.




                                                                       7
ell-eye

Li, small and light, the soft metal with mettle!

               THE FIRST MEMBER OF THE GROUP 1 ALKALI METALS
               [mettle: noun — vigor, stamina; strength of spirit or temperament]

               Lithium is the soft, silvery-white metal at the top of the alkali metals in group 1
               of the periodic table. It’s the smallest of the alkali metals and the lightest of all
               metals. Lithium is one of only three elements (and the only metal) that can trace
               its roots back to the Big Bang; the other two are the gaseous elements hydrogen
               and helium. For much of its existence, lithium has been overlooked in terms of
               practical applications. But in more recent times the element has assumed a far
               more prominent role in our everyday lives (see the next line of the poem).



Keeps much of our mobile-power’d world in good fettle;
               [ fettle: noun — condition; physical state]

               Lithium-ion batteries are so compact and light they’ve become the power source
               for most rechargeable, lightweight, mobile electronic devices, such as phones,
               MP3 players, laptops, notebooks, and tablets. Lithium ion batteries can also store
               significant amounts of energy from solar and wind power, opening new possibil-
               ities for fossil fuel–free energy. For this reason, John B. Goodenough, M. Stanley
               Whittingham, and Akira Yoshino received the 2019 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for
               the development of lithium-ion batteries.



In the sea and the soil,

               Lithium is the 31st most abundant element in Earth’s crust. It’s found at approxi-
               mately 40 parts per million (ppm) in soil and 0.17 ppm in seawater.



Floats on water and oil,

               Because lithium metal is so light, it floats on water. In fact, it reacts vigorously
               with water, whizzing about frantically and shrinking as it produces hydrogen gas
               (H2), which sometimes ignites due to the heat liberated during the reaction. It also
               floats on oil, meaning that it must be coated in Vaseline (petroleum jelly) to be
               stored safely and protected from contact with water and oxygen!




8
Has often helped many’s the troubled mind settle.

             When taken in tablet form as lithium carbonate (Li2CO3), the tiny lithium ion (Li+)
             is a powerfully effective mood stabilizer for those with bipolar disorder.




                                                                                              9
                                                         Be
                                                                     4




                                                         Beryllium
                                                            9.0122




                                               BERYLLIUM, Be




gems ’n’ springs
The neutrons of beryllium were the first that e’er were “seen,”

It sparkles so in crystal gems bedecked in em’rald green,

Its alloys help coil’d springs to make,

And spark-proof tools for safety’s sake.

Yet oh so toxic to the lungs, as dust or fumes I mean!




10
The neutrons of beryllium were the first that e’er were “seen,”

               THE FIRST MEMBER OF THE GROUP 2 ALKALINE EARTH METALS

               Beryllium is a silvery-white, lustrous metal that heads up the alkaline earth
               metals in group 2 of the periodic table. This element played a central role in the
               discovery of the neutron: when English physicist James Chadwick (1891–1974)
               bombarded a sample of beryllium with alpha particles (nuclei of helium) in
               1932, the metal responded by emitting some previously unobserved particles.
               ­Chadwick noted that these particles were electrically neutral and possessed
                about the same mass as the proton. From this, he correctly deduced the existence
                of a new subatomic particle, the neutron. In a way, beryllium’s neutrons were the
                first ever to be observed, and Chadwick’s fundamental discovery in the nuclear
                science domain earned him the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics.



It sparkles so in crystal gems bedecked in em’rald green,

               Emeralds are crystals of beryl, a mineral composed of beryllium aluminum
               silicate, Be3Al2(SiO3)6. Small amounts of either chromium or vanadium within
               an emerald’s crystal structure give these desirable gemstones their glamorous
               green color.



Its alloys help coil’d springs to make,

               Beryllium displays notable strength for a relatively soft, light metal. When
               alloyed with copper and nickel, it’s also exceptionally elastic, making these alloys
               ideal for producing springs, in particular those that drive the mechanical move-
               ments of wind up watches.




                                                                                                 11
And spark-proof tools for safety’s sake.

              A property of beryllium-copper alloys is that they don’t spark on impact, either
              during metal to metal impact or when dropped on the ground or on other hard
              surfaces. This makes them perfect for making spanners, wrenches, and other
              hand tools used in situations where impact sparks could ignite any explosive
              atmospheres (atmospheres containing flammable gases, vapors, or dusts) that
              might occur in chemical plants and oil refineries.



Yet oh so toxic to the lungs, as dust or fumes I mean!

              Inhaling beryllium compounds as dust or fumes can result in berylliosis, a
              chronic inflammation of the lungs that produces shortness of breath. Whether
              the exposure is short lived at higher concentrations or prolonged at lower
              concentrations, the disease can take up to five years to develop and is fatal in
              approximately one third of all cases. Those who survive suffer permanent
              impairment of their lung function.




12
                                                             B
                                                                      5




                                                             Boron
                                                              10.81




                                                            BORON, B




suds ’n’ stuff
The compounds of this metalloid burn with a soft green flame,

All hail to borosilicate, its heat-stable claim to fame.

Its nitride’s hard and oh so rough,

While borax whips up suds ’n’ stuff,

Its acid’s gentle on the eyes, yet insects fear its name!




                                                                          13
The compounds of this metalloid burn with a soft green flame,

               GROUP 13 METALLOID

               Boron is at the top of group 13 on the periodic table, at the start of a boundary line
               that descends diagonally toward the right of the periodic table. The vast swathe
               of elements on the left of this line are metals, while those in the comparatively
               meager cohort on the right are non-metals. Boron is endowed with metallic and
               non-metallic properties and is thus classified as a metalloid. Interestingly, many
               of boron’s compounds burn with a telltale soft green flame.



All hail to borosilicate, its heat-stable claim to fame.

               Pouring boiling water into a normal glass beaker made from silica (silicon
               ­dioxide, SiO2) causes the beaker to shatter because the glass on the inside expands
                faster than the glass on the outside. But adding 12 to 15 percent boric oxide (B2O3)
                to the silica during the manufacturing process allows the glassware to expand at
                the same rate throughout when heated rapidly. Therefore, the threat of thermal
                shock is greatly reduced, making this borosilicate glass—better known as Pyrex®
                glass—the glassware of choice in laboratories the world over.



Its nitride’s hard and oh so rough,

               When combined with nitrogen, boron forms a lustrous, crystalline solid almost
               as hard as diamond. This, coupled with its excellent heat-resistant properties,
               makes boron nitride (BN) a popular industrial abrasive.



While borax whips up suds ’n’ stuff,

               Borax—sodium (tetra)borate, Na2B4O7⋅10H2O—can be used as a laundry aid
               because it helps soften the water by tying up calcium ions (Ca2+), thus making it
               easier to whip up more suds! It also stabilizes (or buffers) the water’s pH, helping
               to promote the chemical reactions involved in cleaning.




14
Its acid’s gentle on the eyes, yet insects fear its name!

               Boric acid (H3BO3) is a weak acid, so much so that it’s used as a mild antiseptic
               and even as an over-the-counter eyewash. Despite being fairly safe for mammals,
               boric acid is toxic to insects. This makes it quite useful as an insecticide, particu-
               larly against cockroaches and ants.




                                                                                                   15
                                                              C
                                                                        6




                                                              Carbon
                                                               12.011




                                                        CARBON, C


this “vital force” of life
From CO2 to CHOs and back to CO2,

And so this “vital force” of life transfers from me to you.

Its PET scans pinpoint cancers,

While its “dating” undoes chancers.

Bond-friendly with its neighbors so, each day brings compounds new.


To carbon our world’s fate is bound through gas and oil and coal,

Organic to our way of life, our true synthetic soul.

From nanotubes and fullerene,

To diamonds, graphite, thin graphene,

This rhyme’s too short by far for all its virtues to extol.

16
          see-oh-two     see-aytch-ohs              see-oh-two

From CO2 to CHOs and back to CO2,

And so this “vital force” of life transfers from me to you.

                             GROUP 14 NON-METAL

                             Photosynthesis is the process whereby plants harness the sun’s energy to drive
                             the reaction between water (H2O) and atmospheric carbon dioxide gas (CO2), pro-
                             ducing breathable oxygen (O2) and edible carbohydrates—chemical compounds
                             made up of carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O). These CHOs are the primary
                             source of energy for your body’s cells, where they react with O2 from the air you
                             inhale.

                                                      CHOs + O2 → CO2 + H2O + Energy

                                     You exhale the CO2 and H2O vapor, which are waste products, thus return-
                             ing the CO2 to the atmosphere. The CO2 is then taken up again by plants to make
                             more CHOs for someone else to eat, and the carbon cycle begins all over again.
                                     In 1828, the German chemist Friedrich Wöhler (1800–1882) successfully
                             synthesized urea (NH2CONH2) in his laboratory. This marked the first time that an
                             otherwise naturally occurring, or organic, chemical had been artificially created
                             without involving living organisms. Naturally occurring urea is a by-product of
                             protein metabolism in the body and is excreted in urine. Until then, the so-called
                             vital force theory had held that such organic chemicals could only be produced
                             by living organisms with the aid of some mysterious vital force within them.
                             Wohler’s synthesis of urea sounded the death knell for this vital force theory and
                             heralded the birth of organic chemistry, the chemistry of carbon.


pet, as in “a pet dog”

Its PET scans pinpoint cancers,

                             Positron emission tomography (PET) is a nuclear magnetic imaging technique that
                             identifies the location of cancer cells in the body. In one application of the tech-
                             nique, a small amount of the vitamin choline, doped with radioactive carbon-11
                             isotope, is injected into a vein. Cancer cells take up this radioactively labeled
                             ­choline more readily than normal cells and can be detected with a PET scan.



While its “dating” undoes chancers.

                             [chancers: noun, plural (slang) — a confidence trickster, “con man,” or rogue]

                             The carbon dating process measures quantities of carbon-14 to find out the
                             approximate age of some types of archaeological artifacts. Carbon-14 is a radioac-
                             tive isotope of carbon that forms in minute amounts when nitrogen in the upper



                                                                                                               17
              atmosphere is bombarded by cosmic rays. It then makes its way (via atmospheric
              CO2) into the structures of all living trees and plants during photosynthesis, accu-
              mulating to extremely low yet detectable levels.
                      Once dead, the tree or plant no longer incorporates any “fresh” carbon-14.
              The remaining carbon-14 gradually decays radioactively with a half-life of 5,730
              years. So, you can estimate the age of an item by measuring how much carbon-14
              it still contains. To carbon-date an ancient artifact, such as a wooden-handled
              knife, you’d first measure the residual amount of carbon-14 within the wooden
              handle. Then, by comparing this result with the amount of the isotope that would
              have been present if the wood were still attached to a living tree, you can esti-
              mate how long it’s been since the piece of wood was cut from the tree to make
              the handle.



Bond-friendly with its neighbors so, each day brings compounds new.

              Carbon’s position at the top of group 14 of the periodic table makes it a particu-
              larly versatile element. It is capable of forming bonds not only with other carbon
              atoms but also with atoms of many other elements, such as hydrogen, oxygen,
              nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, and the halogens.



To carbon our world’s fate is bound through gas and oil and coal,

Organic to our way of life, our true synthetic soul.

              From plastics to medicines (not to mention fuels and energy), today’s world relies
              heavily on the synthetic organic chemistry of carbon. That reliance is destined to
              be challenged in the years ahead as the planet’s finite reserves of carbon-based
              fossil fuels become ever scarcer.



From nanotubes and fullerene,

To diamonds, graphite, thin graphene,

              Depending on how its individual atoms are bonded, carbon can adopt different
              physical forms (known as allotropes). For example, diamond consists of a rigid,
              semi-infinite, 3D array of carbon atoms; each atom is bonded to four others in
              a tetrahedral arrangement. In graphene, each carbon atom is bonded to three
              ­others in a hexagonal, 2D, semi-­infinite, single layer. You can stack multiple
               sheets of graphene on top of each other to produce graphite, the “lead” you find
               in pencils (see “Molybdenum, Mo” on page 123 for more about pencil lead). Or




18
               you can roll the sheets into cylinders to make nanotubes, which are a type of
               fullerene. Alternatively, 60 carbon atoms shaped as a hollow spherical shape (so
               the hexagonal bonding pattern resembles the stitching on a soccer ball) makes
               buckminsterfullerene, C60, the poster child of the fullerenes!




This rhyme’s too short by far for all its virtues to extol.

               This line speaks for itself!




                                                                                             19
