How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow




                                  2
                        BURIED ALIVE




            Now that we’ve properly set up our hack-
           ing infrastructure, let’s discuss our target
          for this hacking exercise. We are going after
       G&S Trust, a niche company that specializes
in the offshoring business. They help the wealthiest
1 percent create shell companies in various parts of
the world to optimize their asset allocation and rev-
enue streams. What you and I would bluntly call tax
evasion is stretched into a whole sentence of obscure
financial jargon that makes it sound like an innocent
Sunday hobby.
     Buckle up people, we are about to embark on a hacking journey that
will take us as far as the Seychelles islands, Cyprus, Hong Kong, and other
tax havens! Our initial aim is to find out as much about G&S Trust as we
                  How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow

                 can, as well as any close partners that might give us an in. This reconnais-
                 sance phase is all about perseverance: we’ll hit some dead ends, but there’s
                 always another path to try.


     Establishing Contact
                 Quick, what’s the first thing that pops into your head when you think about
                 penetrating a company’s defenses? Please don’t say Nmap!
                      Exactly: phishing. If you’re looking for the surest way to breach a spe-
                 cific company, as opposed to casting a wide net to catch low-hanging fruit,
                 phishing is a formidable attack strategy. It exploits a basic human weakness,
                 boredom at work, coupled with the infamous see link/click link syndrome.
                      Phishing may seem like an easy endeavor because of the attention it
                 gets in the media and from self-proclaimed security evangelists, but execut-
                 ing a clean, undetected, and targeted phishing campaign requires hard
                 work and meticulous preparation.
                      Before diving into the technical details, let’s first gather a bit of infor-
                 mation about G&S Trust. Their main website, www.gs-crp.com (Figure 2-1),
                 states that G&S Trust has five senior partners, spread across five geographic
                 locations: Cyprus, the Seychelles, Hong Kong, Malta, and the newly opened
                 Singapore office.




                 Figure 2-1: The home page for www.gs-crp.com

                     We might be able to leverage this geographical distribution in our phish-
                 ing email. For example, staff in the Singapore office might find a new IT tool
                 or problems inherent to new offices convincing subjects.
                     The main issue we presently face, however, is the small number of
                 potential targets. So far, we’ve only identified five senior executives, plus
                 a few accountants that popped up on old job postings, which brings our
                 total to a whopping seven. We haven’t managed to find a full list of current
                 employees on LinkedIn or similar professional social media websites, so we
                 can’t be sure of the total count. This is understandable given the company’s
                 line of work and obvious need for secrecy, but it puts us in a minor predica-
                 ment. Phishing is, after all, a numbers game. The more targets we have, the
                 more flexibility we gain. Seven people is a seriously small pool of targets; it
                 doesn’t give us much room for testing, much less failure.
                     Furthermore, it’s not like we can breach the company’s network by send-
                 ing a trapped attachment to senior executives, who likely spend most of their
                 time working on iPads or iPhones from an airport’s VIP lounge. Even if we


14   Chapter 2
        How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow

       landed the perfect zero-day on iOS, which arguably would require a signifi-
       cant effort, we’d still be constrained to that specific device, without much
       room for pivoting to other machines containing the information we’re after.



                                      “HACKING IS E A S Y !”

           At some point, you may come across some old-school veteran pentester on
           social media loudly proclaiming that “Hacking is easy. You just need to drop
           a USB Rubber Ducky in a parking lot and wait for shells to pour in. Haha.”
                 Right.
                 Maybe that was true 25 years ago, when you could dial in to an electric
           main grid over Telnet with “root/root” credentials, but those days are long
           gone. That’s not to say dropping USB keys never works anymore. The WHID
           project (https://github.com/whid-injector/WHID/) is a great testimony to that
           fact. However, there are some intricate problems to solve for it to be success-
           ful: How will you drop these keys anonymously at the target location? What if
           the target is on the other side of the planet? What if everyone at the target is
           running USB-C computers? What if the staff are using macOS Catalina, which
           explicitly asks them to register the keyboard when they plug it in? What about
           USB whitelisting, enforced in many banks? My point is that one needs to prop-
           erly plan for all these scenarios and move carefully. Arguing that phishing or
           USB dropping is an easy and foolproof method is neither sensible nor helpful.
                 Does that mean hacking is hard? As with so many aspects of life, often
           the answer is it depends. It depends on the company’s security posture; their
           awareness of the implicit risks they accumulate every time they take a shortcut;
           their willingness to invest time and resources in tech projects with no immedi-
           ate returns; or, to phrase it differently, their willingness to sacrifice short-term
           rewards for sustainable and secure growth. Of course, it also depends on the
           hacker’s experience and strategy.



            In the case of G&S Trust, we’d love to jump in and give phishing a try,
       but the simple fact is that the target list is too narrow to guarantee a decent
       success rate, and managing partners are not the ideal victims for our cur-
       rent scenario.
            Let’s leave this phishing thing aside for now as a last-resort weapon to try
       if everything else fails. Maybe we can find another entry point—perhaps a
       vulnerability in one of their internet-facing applications? Let’s dig into that.


Scouring the Web
       We use the dig command to return the IP address of www.gs-crp.com
       and a whois lookup to figure out who hosts the main G&S Trust website
       (Listing 2-1). The +short flag shortens the output of the dig command.



                                                                                      Buried Alive   15
                  How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow

                 root@FrontLine:~# dig +short www.gs-crp.com
                 50.28.34.195
                 root@FrontLine:~# whois 50.28.34.195
                 NetRange:       50.28.0.0 - 50.28.127.255
                 CIDR:           50.28.0.0/17
                 NetName:        LIQUIDWEB
                 NetHandle:      NET-50-28-0-0-1

                 Listing 2-1: Inspecting gs-crp.com

                       The main website is hosted by the third party LiquidWeb, a popular
                 managed web hosting provider. We won’t bother checking for vulnerabili-
                 ties in this website since we’re trying to breach G&S Trust’s network, not
                 that of its hosting provider.
                       Instead, we’ll look for other websites and applications belonging to
                 G&S Trust. For this we could rely on traditional subdomain enumeration
                 using tools such as DNSRecon (https://github.com/darkoperator/dnsrecon/) or
                 Amass (https://github.com/OWASP/Amass/), but there’s a much more efficient
                 tool to uncover obscure subdomains linked to a company’s name: Censys
                 (https://censys.io/).
                       Censys is a platform created by researchers at the University of Michigan
                 that scans the internet looking for open ports, HTTP banners, and other
                 valuable information. In this respect it’s no different from Shodan (https://
                 shodan.io/), but it gets more interesting than that. Censys also indexes SSL
                 certificates, including the Common Name (CN) field that specifies alterna-
                 tive subdomains covered by the same certificate. This should give us the
                 list of subdomains attached to a current IP address. For example, a simple
                 search for gs-crp.com reveals a rich set of subdomains, shown in Figure 2-2.




                 Figure 2-2: Uncovering subdomains with Censys

       NOTE      While Censys is a great tool to find the more complicated and uncommon subdo-
                 mains, such as mytaxadvice.gs-crp.com, it’s also a good idea to try traditional
                 DNS brute-forcing tools like DNSRecon, to draw the most accurate picture possible.

                      The Python script censys_search.py available in the book’s resources
                 (https://github.com/sparcflow/HackLikeALegend/, under the folder py_scripts) will
                 query the Censys API, weed out unrelated domains, and clean up the result




16   Chapter 2
How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow

so it’s in a readable format. It requires free Censys API credentials, which
are available for registered accounts from the main website. To obtain a
Censys API key:

1. Go to https://www.censys.io/register/.
2. Create an account. You’ll be sent an email with a confirmation link;
   click this link to verify your account and log in to the site.
3. Go to https://search.censys.io/account/api/ and copy the API ID and Secret
   values.

    Once you have those values, set them as environment variables using
the export command and run the script on gs-crp.com:

root@FrontLine:~# export CENSYS_ID=de0ef7de-badd-5...
root@FrontLine:~# export CENSYS_SECRET=eDCQE...
root@FrontLine:~# python censys_search.py gs-crp.com

INFO:__main__:Looking up gs-crp.com on censys
INFO:__main__:Found 32 unique domains
mytaxadvice.gs-crp.com
career.gs-crp.com
mail.gs-crp.com
owa.gs-crp.com
www.gs-crp.com

     This gives us a tiny list of unique domains associated with the main
G&S Trust site. Isn’t that depressing? I know G&S Trust is a niche company,
but there are local shops with more domains than that!
     In case we’ve missed any associated websites we fire a few more search
requests through our custom Censys script, aiming randomly at other
potential top-level domains or name variations such as gs-crp.net, gs-crp.org,
gs-trust.com, gs-foundation.com, and so on, but we get no hits. We end up with
the following list:

•   mytaxadvice.gs-crp.com
•   career.gs-crp.com
•   mail.gs-crp.com
•   owa.gs-crp.com
•   www.gs-crp.com
•   gstrust-foundation.org

    Some of these websites might be hosted by third parties and others by
G&S Trust itself, so just like before, we’ll inspect the network owners to
shed light on the assets’ physical locations.
    In the book’s resources (https://github.com/sparcflow/HackLikeALegend/,
folder py_scripts) you’ll find a handy Python script called query_whois.py that
exposes the site hosts for a list of domains. It loops through multiple whois



                                                                     Buried Alive   17
                     How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow

                    calls and extracts relevant information into a readable CSV file. Listing 2-2
                    shows the results when we run it.

root@FrontLine:~# python query_whois.sh domains.txt| column -s"," -t
www.gs-crp.com liquidweb    58.28.0.0–58.28.127.255   US
career.gs-crp.com liquidweb 58.28.0.0–58.28.127.255 US
mytaxadvice.gs-crp.com liquidweb 58.28.0.0–58.28.127.255 US
gstrust-foundation.org google-cloud 104.19.0.0–104.19.255.255 US
mail.gs-crp.com GS-TRUST 182.239.127.137-182.239.127.145 HK
owa.gs-crp.com GS-TRUST 182.239.127.137-182.239.127.145 HK

Listing 2-2: The results of running query_whois.py on our list of domains

                         Only the webmail addresses mail.gs-crp.com and owa.gs-crp.com seem to
                    be located within the company’s IP range that we retrieved in Listing 2-2:
                    182.239.127.137–182.239.127.145. Other web applications, such as career.gs
                    -crp.com, are hosted on cloud providers like LiquidWeb and Google Cloud.
                         We visit mail.gs-crp.com in the browser and notice it is running the
                    Outlook Web App (Figure 2-3)—probably the Microsoft Exchange 2019
                    version, from the looks of it.




                    Figure 2-3: We see the Outlook Web App when visiting mail.gs-crp.com.

                         We try playing with the webmail interface, looking for hidden directo-
                    ries, injecting special characters here and there . . . basically, we try every
                    classic web technique, but who are we kidding? Unless we dig out a zero-day
                    on the official Outlook Web App 2019, we’re not getting in.

        NOTE        As fate would have it, at the time I was writing this close to 30,000 companies were
                    compromised due to a flood of Microsoft Exchange vulnerabilities that granted a full
                    working shell without any credentials—a clean remote code execution. You can see the
                    exploit at https://www.exploit-db.com/exploits/49637/; for further reading see
                    https://bit.ly/3CgHY4s.

                        Next, we try scanning with Nmap in an attempt to find reachable ser-
                    vices on the whole IP range owned by G&S Trust. The -sV flag displays the
                    service’s version, while -p- scans all 65,535 ports on each machine:

                    root@FrontLine:~# nmap -p- -sV 182.239.127.137-145
                    Starting Nmap 7.01 ( https://nmap.org )
                    Nmap scan report for 182.239.127.139

18    Chapter 2
        How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow
        Host is up (0.023s latency).
        Not shown: 65535 filtered ports

        Nmap scan report for 182.239.127.139
        Host is up (0.023s latency).
        Not shown: 65534 filtered ports
        PORT     STATE SERVICE
        443/tcp open   https
        --snip--

            Alas, this returns no significant results. Let’s take a moment to recap.
        We are targeting a small company with maybe 15 or 25 employees, 7 of
        whom we can identify on the net. It has one webmail interface on the inter-
        net, four websites hosted by third parties, and nine allocated IP addresses,
        hardly exposing any services.
            Have I bummed you out yet, or should I keep going?


Finding the Weak Links
        When facing a target so small that even Google has trouble indexing its
        websites, you should always pause for a few seconds and think about the big
        picture. G&S Trust is not an island lost in the big blue sea that is the inter-
        net. The company must have multiple interactions with different vendors,
        business partners, and contractors to function properly in today’s economic
        world. It’s not called the World Wide Web for nothing.
             So yes, G&S Trust might be immune to most of our reconnaissance
        probes because it has made it its mission and business model to stay off the
        grid—but what about its business partners? I’m not suggesting that we hack
        Microsoft or Apple to get inside this small company, no matter how many
        billions of dollars it buries in tax shelters. But surely it must have weaker
        and more exposed partners that we can infiltrate and use as a trampoline
        to bounce onto the internal network?
             We go back again to our reconnaissance phase and scrape together
        every piece of news about G&S Trust that might disclose business partners
        or technologies it uses. We’re looking for information on HR software,
        recent mergers and acquisitions, accounting software, and senior partners’
        backgrounds.
             We won’t go into all of them here, but you can find a plethora of open
        source intelligence (OSINT) tools at https://github.com/jivoi/awesome-osint/,
        from specialty search engines like BizNar that compile information on a
        given company, to document search tools such as Sopdf.com, to people and
        social media search engines. The availability of these tools almost makes it
        easy to forget how tedious this first step of compiling information really is.
             Companies often unknowingly divulge a significant amount of infor-
        mation about their internal gears via various means—probably more than
        intended. Take job descriptions, for instance. We gain a trove of data simply
        by looking at an old IT support job listing G&S Trust posted on Monster.com
        (Figure 2-4).


                                                                             Buried Alive   19
                  How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow




                 Figure 2-4: A G&S Trust job description

                      From this alone, we are able to figure out that at the time the job
                 opening was listed G&S Trust used Windows 8.1 and 10 computers, worked
                 mainly with SQL Server 2012 databases, and had installed Juniper and
                 Cisco firewalls. While this might not help us get in directly (unless we use
                 some form of social engineering), it might provide valuable insight once
                 inside the network.
                      Since G&S Trust has offices in Hong Kong, we go to the official Hong
                 Kong company registry website, https://www.cr.gov.hk/, and search for official
                 filings. We find out that the company filed for a name change two years ago;
                 it used to be called “GST Offshore Limited.” Armed with this new informa-
                 tion, we head back to our company research websites (biznar.com, dnb.com,
                 opencorporates.com, and others) to hopefully unearth something useful.
                      On dnb.com, we find the names of three directors not currently listed
                 on the G&S Trust website. We hunt them down on LinkedIn. All three pro-
                 files mention some obscure skills that seem to be related to the corporate
                 finance world (Figure 2-5).




                 Figure 2-5: LinkedIn profiles revealing some G&S Trust inner workings

                      A quick Google search on the “Strat Accounting” skill reveals that this
                 is in fact a software product owned and maintained by Strat Jumbo Inc., a
                 multi-national development company.
                      Looking further into Strat Jumbo, we learn that it specializes in devel-
                 oping financial products, ranging from SWIFT connectors that plug into
                 the banking network to workstation tools like Strat Accounting, which is
                 apparently used by the financial employees at G&S Trust. Do you smell
                 that? That’s the scent of a very tempting yet dangerous idea taking shape
                 somewhere in the darkness of our minds.
                      Since G&S Trust is so tightly locked down—from the outside, at least—
                 how about targeting the much larger fish, Strat Jumbo, whose business we
                 don’t care about but which could perhaps give us free access to G&S Trust’s
                 network?



20   Chapter 2
        How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow

            Of course, it’s unlikely that Strat Jumbo is directly connected to G&S
       Trust’s internal network. It’s a software development company, not a stra-
       tegic business partner. The more likely scenario is that we infiltrate Strat
       Jumbo’s corporate network, locate Strat Accounting’s code repository, and
       then plant a backdoor that gets triggered the next time G&S Trust updates
       its accounting software on the employee workstations. To execute this strat-
       egy, we’ll have to carefully design a backdoor to only trigger in G&S Trust’s
       environment. The last thing we want is to infect half the planet, causing
       mayhem and fury around the world (NotPetya, anyone?).
            You may be wondering how this technique is different from phishing,
       which most of the time tends to yield the same result: executing payloads
       like reverse shells on a sizable number of workstations.
            One word: trust.
            Instead of shipping the payload in an email that goes through 36 secu-
       rity hoops before landing on the user’s workstation, our payload is delivered
       by a trusted and verifiable emissary, Strat Jumbo.
            If the antivirus software flags our email attachment, an investigation
       is usually quickly instigated; security analysts are called, and sometimes
       the issue escalates to the chief information security officer (CISO). On the
       other hand, if the antivirus flags the accounting software that has been
       used for the last 10 years, it takes just one call to the IT admin team and the
       antivirus is either disabled or adjusted to spare the defiant software. How’s
       that for preferential treatment?


Resources

       •    Link to buy a USB Rubber Ducky: https://hakshop.com/products/usb-rubber
            -ducky-deluxe/
       •    Link to the Microsoft Exchange exploit: https://www.exploit-db.com/
            exploits/49637/
       •    Further reading on the Microsoft Exchange vulnerability: https://www
            .welivesecurity.com/2021/03/10/exchange-servers-under-siege-10-apt-groups/
       •    A collection of OSINT material and resources: https://github.com/jivoi/
            awesome-osint/
       •    A description of the NotPetya (aka Nyetna) attack: http://blog.talosintelligence
            .com/2017/07/the-medoc-connection.html




                                                                               Buried Alive   21
How to Hack Like a Legend (Sample Chapter) © 3/23/22 by Sparc Flow
