                       2
T H E T E X T- P R O C E S S I N G P I P E L I N E




             Now that you understand the structure of
             an NLP application, it’s time to see these
           underlying concepts in action. In this chap-
       ter, you’ll install spaCy and set up your working
environment. Then you’ll learn about the text-­processing
pipeline, a series of basic NLP operations you’ll use to
determine the meaning and intent of a discourse. These
operations include ­tokenization, lemmatization, part-
of-speech tagging, syntactic dependency parsing, and
named entity recognition.
     Setting Up Your Working Environment
                 Before you start using spaCy, you need to set up a working environment by
                 installing the following software components on your machine:

                 •   Python 2.7 or later, or 3.4 or later
                 •   The spaCy library
                 •   A statistical model for spaCy

                     You’ll need Python 2.7 or later, or 3.4 or later to use spaCy v2.0. Down­
                 load it at https://www.python.org/downloads/ and follow the instructions to set
                 up a Python environment. Next, install spaCy in your Python environment
                 using pip by running the following command:

                 $ pip install spacy

                     If you have more than one Python installation on your system, select
                 the pip executable associated with the Python installation you want to use.
                 For instance, if you want to use spaCy with Python 3.5, you’d run the follow-
                 ing command:

                 $ pip3.5 install spacy

                     If you already have spaCy installed on your system, you might want
                 to upgrade it to a new release. The examples in this book assume you
                 use spaCy v2.0.x or later. You can verify which version of spaCy you have
                 installed with the following command:

                 $ python -m spacy info

                      Once again, you might need to replace the python command with the
                 command for the python executable used in your particular environment,
                 say, python3.5. From now on, we’ll use python and pip regardless of the exe-
                 cutables your system uses.
                      If you decide to upgrade your installed spaCy package to the latest ver-
                 sion, you can do this using the following pip command:

                 $ pip install -U spacy



     Installing Statistical Models for spaCy
                 The spaCy installation doesn’t include statistical models that you’ll need
                 when you start using the library. The statistical models contain knowledge
                 collected about the particular language from a set of sources. You must
                 separately download and install each model you want to use.
                     Several pretrained statistical models are available for different lan-
                 guages. For English, for example, the following models are available for


16   Chapter 2
       download from spaCy’s website: en_core_web_sm, en_core_web_md, en_core_web_lg,
       and en_vectors_web_lg. The models use the following naming convention:
       lang_type_genre_size. Lang specifies the language. Type indicates the model’s
       capabilities (for example, core is a general-purpose model that includes
       vocabulary, syntax, entities, and vectors). Genre indicates the type of text
       the model has been trained on: web (such as Wikipedia or similar media
       resources) or news (news articles). Size indicates how large the model is:
       lg is large, md is medium, and sm is small. The larger the model is, the more
       disk space it requires. For example, the en_vectors_web_lg-2.1.0 model takes
       631MB, whereas en_core_web_sm-2.1.0 takes only 10MB.
            To follow along with the examples provided in this book, en_core_web_sm
       (the most lightweight model) will work fine. spaCy will choose it by default
       when you use spaCy’s download command:

       $ python -m spacy download en

           The en shortcut link in the command instructs spaCy to download and
       install the best-matching default model for the English language. The best-
       matching model, in this context, means the one that is generated for the
       specified language (English in this example), a general purpose model, and
       the most lightweight.
           To download a specific model, you must specify its name, like this:

       $ python -m spacy download en_core_web_md

           Once installed, you can load the model using this same shortcut you
       specified during the installation:

       nlp = spacy.load('en')



Basic NLP Operations with spaCy
       Let’s begin by performing a chain of basic NLP operations that we call a
       processing pipeline. spaCy does all these operations for you behind the
       scenes, allowing you to concentrate on your application’s specific logic.
       Figure 2-1 provides a simplified depiction of this process.
                                                  Pipeline



        Input                                                                      Entity            Doc
                  Tokenization    Lemmatization      Tagging      Parsing
         text                                                                   recognition         object




       Figure 2-1: A high-level view of the processing pipeline




                                                                            The Text-Processing Pipeline   17
                       The processing pipeline typically includes tokenization, lemmatization,
                   part-of-speech tagging, syntactic dependency parsing, and named entity
                   recognition. We’ll introduce each of these tasks in this section.

                   Tokenization
                   The very first action any NLP application typically performs on a text is
                   parsing that text into tokens, which can be words, numbers, or punctuation
                   marks. Tokenization is the first operation because all the other operations
                   require you to have tokens already in place.
                       The following code shows the tokenization process:

                 u import spacy
                 v nlp = spacy.load('en')
                 w doc = nlp(u'I am flying to Frisco')
                 x print([w.text for w in doc])

                        We start by importing the spaCy library u to gain access to its function-
                   ality. Then, we load a model package using the en shortcut link v to create
                   an instance of spaCy’s Language class. A Language object contains the lan-
                   guage’s vocabulary and other data from the statistical model. We call the
                   Language object nlp.
                        Next, we apply the object just created w to a sample sentence, creating
                   a Doc object instance. A Doc object is a container for a sequence of Token
                   objects. spaCy generates it implicitly based on the text you provide it.
                        At this point, with just three lines of code, spaCy has generated the
                   grammatical structure for the sample sentence. How you’ll use it is entirely
                   up to you. In this very simple example, you just print out the text content of
                   each token from the sample sentence x.
                        The script outputs the sample sentence’s tokens as a list:

                   ['I', 'am', 'flying', 'to', 'Frisco']

                        The text content—the group of characters that compose the token, such
                   as the letters “a” and “m” in the token “am”—is just one of many properties
                   of a Token object. You can also extract various linguistic features assigned
                   to a token, as you’ll see in the following examples.

                   Lemmatization
                   A lemma is the base form of a token. You can think of it as the form in
                   which the token would appear if it were listed in a dictionary. For example,
                   the lemma for the token “flying” is “fly.” Lemmatization is the process of
                   reducing word forms to their lemma. The following script provides a
                   simple example of how to do lemmatization with spaCy:

                   import spacy
                   nlp = spacy.load('en')




18   Chapter 2
       doc = nlp(u'this product integrates both libraries for downloading and
       applying patches')
       for token in doc:
         print(utoken.text, vtoken.lemma_)

           The first three lines in the script are the same as those in the previous
       script. Recall that they import the spaCy library, load an English model
       using the en shortcut and create a text-processing pipeline, and apply the
       pipeline to a sample sentence—creating a Doc object through which you
       can access the grammatical structure of the sentence.

NOTE   In grammar, sentence structure is the arrangement of individual words, as well as
       phrases and clauses in a sentence. The grammatical meaning of a sentence depends
       on this structural organization.

           Once you have a Doc object containing the tokens from your example
       sentence, you iterate over those tokens in a loop, and then print out a
       token’s text content u along with its corresponding lemma v. This script
       produces the following output (I’ve tabulated it to make it more readable):

       this        this
       product     product
       integrates integrate
       both        both
       libraries   library
       for         for
       downloading download
       and         and
       applying    apply
       patches     patch

           The column on the left contains the tokens, and the column on the
       right contains their lemmas.

       Applying Lemmatization for Meaning Recognition
       Lemmatization is an important step in the task of meaning recognition. To
       see how, let’s return to the sample sentence from the previous section:

       I am flying to Frisco.

           Suppose this sentence was submitted to an NLP application interacting
       with an online system that provides an API for booking tickets for trips. The
       application processes a customer’s request, extracting necessary information
       from it and then passing on that information to the underlying API. This
       design might look like the one depicted in Figure 2-2.




                                                                  The Text-Processing Pipeline   19
                                            I am flying to Frisco.
                         NLP
                      application




                                          Form of travel: fly
                                          Destination: San Francisco



                                                                        Online ticket booking
                                                                                 API


                   Figure 2-2: Using lemmatization in the process of extracting necessary
                   information from a customer’s request

                         The NLP application tries to get the following information from a cus-
                   tomer’s request: a form of travel (plane, rail, bus, and so on) and a destina-
                   tion. The application needs to first determine whether the customer wants
                   an air ticket, a railway ticket, or a bus ticket. To determine this, the applica-
                   tion searches for a word that matches one of the keywords in the predefined
                   list. An easy way to simplify the search for these keywords is to first convert
                   all the words in a sentence being processed to their lemmas. In that case, the
                   predefined list of keywords will be much shorter and clearer. For example,
                   you won’t need to include all the word forms of the word fly (such as “fly,”
                   “flying,” “flew,” and “flown”) to serve as an indicator that the customer wants
                   an air ticket, reducing all possible variants to the base form of the word—
                   that is, “fly.”
                         Lemmatization also comes in handy when the application tries to deter-
                   mine a destination from a submitted request. There are a lot of nicknames
                   for the globe’s cities. But the system that books the tickets requires official
                   names. Of course, the default Tokenizer that performs lemmatization won’t
                   know the difference between nicknames and official names for cities, coun-
                   tries, and so on. To solve this problem, you can add special case rules to an
                   existing Tokenizer instance.
                         The following script illustrates how you might implement lemmatiza-
                   tion for the destination cities example. It prints out the lemmas of the
                   words composing the sentence.

                   import spacy
                   from spacy.symbols import ORTH, LEMMA
                   nlp = spacy.load('en')
                   doc = nlp(u'I am flying to Frisco')
                   print([w.text for w in doc])
                 u special_case = [{ORTH: u'Frisco', LEMMA: u'San Francisco'}]
                 v nlp.tokenizer.add_special_case(u'Frisco', special_case)
                 w print([w.lemma_ for w in nlp(u'I am flying to Frisco')])



20   Chapter 2
    You define a special case for the word Frisco u by replacing its default
lemma with San Francisco. Then you add this special case to the Tokenizer
instance v. Once added, the Tokenizer instance will use this special case
each time it’s asked for the lemma of Frisco. To make sure that everything
works as expected, you print out the lemmas of the words in the sentence w.
    The script generates the following output:

['I', 'am', 'flying', 'to', 'Frisco']
['-PRON-', 'be', 'fly', 'to', 'San Francisco']

    The output lists the lemmas for all words occurring in the sentence
with the exception of Frisco, for which it lists San Francisco.

Part-of-Speech Tagging
A part-of-speech tag tells you the part-of-speech (noun, verb, and so on) of
a given word in a given sentence. (Recall from Chapter 1 that a word can
act as more than one part of speech depending on the context in which it
appears.)
     In spaCy, part-of-speech tags can include detailed information about a
token. In the case of verbs, they might tell you the following features: tense
(past, present, or future), aspect (simple, progressive, or perfect), person
(1st, 2nd, or 3rd), and number (singular or plural).
     Extracting these verb part-of-speech tags can help identify a user’s intent
when tokenization and lemmatization alone aren’t sufficient. For instance,
the lemmatization script for the ticket booking application in the preceding
section won’t decide how the NLP application chooses words in a sentence to
compose a request to the underlying API. In a real situation, doing so might
be quite complicated. For example, a customer’s request might consist of
more than one sentence:

I have flown to LA. Now I am flying to Frisco.

    For these sentences, the results of lemmatization would be as follows:

['-PRON-', 'have', 'fly', 'to', 'LA', '.', 'now', '-PRON-', 'be', 'fly', 'to',
'San Francisco', '.']

    Performing lemmatization alone isn’t enough here; the application might
consider the lemmas “fly” and “LA” from the first sentence as the keywords,
indicating that the customer intends to fly to LA when in fact the customer
intends to fly to San Francisco. Part of the problem is that lemmatization
changes verbs to their infinitive forms, making it hard to know the role they
play in a sentence.
    This is where part-of-speech tags come into play. In English, the core
parts of speech include noun, pronoun, determiner, adjective, verb, adverb,
preposition, conjunction, and interjection. (See the linguistic primer in
the Appendix for more information about these parts of speech.) In spaCy,
these same categories—plus some additional ones for symbols, punctuation

                                                         The Text-Processing Pipeline   21
                 marks, and others—are called coarse-grained parts of speech and are available
                 as a fixed set of tags through the Token.pos (int) and Token.pos_ (unicode)
                 attributes.
                      Also, spaCy offers fine-grained parts of speech tags that provide more
                 detailed information about a token, covering morphological features, such
                 as verb tenses and types of pronouns. Naturally, the list of fine-grained parts
                 of speech contains many more tags than the coarse-grained list. The fine-
                 grained part-of-speech tags are available as the Token.tag (int) and Token.tag_
                 (unicode) attributes.
                      Table 2-1 lists some of the common part-of-speech tags used in spaCy
                 for English models.

                 Table 2-1: Some Common spaCy Part-of-Speech Tags

                  TAG (fine-grained POS (coarse-grained Morphology                  Description
                  part of speech)   part of speech)
                  NN                  NOUN                    Number=sing           Noun, singular
                  NNS                 NOUN                    Number=plur           Noun, plural
                  PRP                 PRON                    PronType=prs          Pronoun, personal
                  PRP$                PRON                    PronType=prs          Pronoun, possessive
                                                               Poss=yes
                  VB                  VERB                    VerbForm=inf          Verb, base form
                  VBD                 VERB                    VerbForm=fin          Verb, past tense
                                                               Tense=past
                  VBG                 VERB                    VerbForm=part         Verb, gerund, or
                                                               Tense=pres           present participle
                                                               Aspect=prog
                  JJ                  ADJ                     Degree=pos            Adjective



        NOTE     You can find the entire list of the fine-grained part-of-speech tags used in spaCy in
                 the “Part-of-Speech Tagging” section in the Annotation Specifications manual at
                 https://spacy.io/api/annotation#pos-tagging.

                      Tense and aspect are perhaps the most interesting properties of verbs
                 for NLP applications. Together, they indicate a verb’s reference to a ­position
                 in time. For example, we use the present tense progressive aspect form of a verb
                 to describe what is happening right now or what will happen in the near
                 future. To form the present tense progressive aspect verb, you add the pres-
                 ent tense form of the verb “to be” before an -ing verb. For example, in the
                 sentence “I am looking into it,” you add “am”—the form of the verb “to be”
                 in the first person, present tense—before the -ing verb “looking.” In this
                 example, “am” indicates the present tense and “looking” points to the pro-
                 gressive aspect.




22   Chapter 2
Using Part-of-Speech Tags to Find Relevant Verbs
The ticket booking application could use the fine-grained part-of speech
tags available in spaCy to filter the verbs in the discourse, choosing only
those that could be key to determining the customer’s intent.
    Before moving onto the code for this process, let’s try to figure out what
kind of utterances a customer might use to express their intention to book
a plane ticket to, say, LA. We could start by looking at some sentences that
contain the following combination of lemmas: “fly”, “to”, and “LA”. Here are
some simple options:

I flew to LA.
I have flown to LA.
I need to fly to LA.
I am flying to LA.
I will fly to LA.

     Notice that although all of these sentences would include the “fly to LA”
combination if reduced to lemmas, only some of them imply the customer’s
intent to book a plane ticket to LA. The first two definitely aren’t suitable.
     A quick analysis reveals that the past and past perfect forms of the verb
“fly”—the tenses used in the first two sentences—don’t imply the intent we’re
looking for. Only the infinitive and present progressive forms are suitable.
The following script illustrates how to find those forms in the sample
discourse:

import spacy
nlp = spacy.load('en')
doc = nlp(u'I have flown to LA. Now I am flying to Frisco.')
print([w.text for w in doc if uw.tag_== v'VBG' or w.tag_== w'VB'])

    The tag_ property u of a Token object contains the fine-grained part-
of-speech attribute assigned to that object. You use a loop performed over
the tokens composing the discourse to check whether the fine-grained
part-of-speech tag assigned to a token is VB (a verb in the base, or infinitive,
form) w or VBG (a verb in the present progressive form) v.
    In the sample discourse, only the verb “flying” in the second sentence
meets the specified condition. So you should see the following output:

['flying']

     Of course, fine-grained part-of-speech tags aren’t only assigned to
verbs; they’re also assigned to the other parts of speech in a sentence. For
example, spaCy would recognize LA and Frisco as proper nouns—nouns
that are the names of individuals, places, objects, or organizations—and
tag them with PROPN. If you wanted, you could add the following line of code
to the previous script:

print([w.text for w in doc if w.pos_ == 'PROPN'])



                                                         The Text-Processing Pipeline   23
                     Adding that code should output the following list:

                 ['LA', 'Frisco']

                     The proper nouns from both sentences of the sample discourse are in
                 the list.

                 Context Is Important
                 Fine-grained part-of-speech tags might not always be enough to determine
                 an utterance’s meaning. For this, you might still need to rely on context.
                 As an example, consider the following utterance: “I am flying to LA.” The
                 part-of-speech tagger will assign the VBG tag to the verb “flying” in this
                 example, because it’s in the present progressive form. But because we use
                 this verb form to describe either what is happening right now or what will
                 happen in the near future, the utterance might mean either “I’m already
                 in the sky, ­flying to LA.” or “I’m going to fly to LA.” When submitted to the
                 ticket booking NLP application, the application should interpret only one
                 of these sentences as “I need an air ticket to LA.” Similarly, consider the
                 following discourse: “I am flying to LA. In the evening, I have to be back
                 in Frisco.” This most likely implies that the speaker wants an air ticket from
                 LA to Frisco for an evening flight. You’ll find more examples about recog-
                 nizing meaning based on context in “Using Context to Improve the Ticket-
                 Booking Chatbot” on page 91.

                 Syntactic Relations
                 Now let’s combine the proper nouns with the verb that the part-of-speech
                 tagger selected earlier. Recall that the list of verbs you could potentially
                 use to identify the intent of the discourse contains only the verb “flying” in
                 the second sentence. How can you get the verb/proper noun pair that best
                 describes the intent behind the discourse? A human would obviously com-
                 pose the verb/proper noun pairs from words found in the same sentence.
                 Because the verb “flown” in the first sentence doesn’t meet the condition
                 specified (remember that only infinitive and present progressive forms
                 meet the condition), you’d be able to compose such a pair for the second
                 sentence only: “flying, Frisco.”
                      To handle these situations programmatically, spaCy features a ­syntactic
                 dependency parser that discovers syntactic relations between individual tokens
                 in a sentence and connects syntactically related pairs of words with a
                 single arc.
                      Like lemmas and part-of-speech tags discussed in the previous sec-
                 tions, syntactic dependency labels are linguistic features that spaCy assigns
                 to the Token objects that make up a text contained in a Doc object. For
                 example, the dependency label dobj stands for “direct object.” We could
                 illustrate the syntactic relation it represents as an arrow arc, as shown in
                 Figure 2-3.



24   Chapter 2
                                              HE A D A ND CHILD

       A syntactic dependency label describes the type of syntactic relation between
       two words in a sentence. In such a pair, one word is the syntactic governor
       (also called the head or parent) and the other is the dependent (also called
       the child). spaCy assigns a syntactic dependency label to the pair’s depen-
       dent. For example, in the pair “need, ticket,” extracted from the sentence “I
       need a plane ticket,” the word “ticket” is the child and word “need” is the
       head, because “need” is the verb in what’s called a verb phrase. In this same
       sentence, “a plane ticket” is a noun phrase: the noun “ticket” is the head, and
       “a” and “plane” are its children. To learn more, consult the linguistic primer in
       “Dependency Grammars vs. Phrase Structure Grammars” on page 185.
            Each word in a sentence has exactly one head. Consequently, a word can
       be a child only to one head. The opposite is not always the case. The same
       word can act as a head in none, one, or several pairs. The latter means that
       the head has several children. This explains why a dependency label is always
       assigned to the child.




                             Dependency label

                           dobj




    Head                                            Child
             need                         ticket
             VERB                    NOUN

                     Coarse-grained
                    part-of-speech tags

Figure 2-3: A graphical representation of
a syntactic dependency arc

     The dobj label is assigned to the word “ticket” because it’s the child
of the relation. A dependency label is always assigned to the child. In
your script, you can determine the head of a relation using the Token.head
attribute.
     You might also want to look at the other head/child relations in the
­sentence, like the ones shown in Figure 2-4.

                                    dobj

                                            det
     nsubj
                                                   compound

I            need            a            plane               ticket

Figure 2-4: Head/child relations in an entire sentence


                                                                       The Text-Processing Pipeline   25
                     As you can see, the same word in a sentence can participate in several
                 syntactic relations. Table 2-2 lists some of the most commonly used English
                 dependency labels.

                 Table 2-2: Some Common Dependency Labels

                  Dependency label         Description
                  acomp                    Adjectival complement
                  amod                     Adjectival modifier
                  aux                      Auxiliary
                  compound                 Compound
                  dative                   Dative
                  det                      Determiner
                  dobj                     Direct object
                  nsubj                    Nominal subject
                  pobj                     Object of preposition
                  ROOT                     Root


                     The ROOT label marks the token whose head is itself. Typically, spaCy
                 assigns it to the main verb of the sentence (the verb that is at the heart of
                 the predicate). Every complete sentence should have a verb with the ROOT
                 tag and a subject with the nsubj tag. The other elements are optional.

        NOTE     Most of the examples in this book will assume that the submitted text is a complete
                 sentence and use the ROOT tag to locate the sentence’s main verb. Keep in mind that
                 this won’t work for every possible input.

                     The following script illustrates how to access the syntactic dependency
                 labels of the tokens in the discourse from the example in the “Part-of-Speech
                 Tagging” on page 21:

                 import spacy
                 nlp = spacy.load('en')
                 doc = nlp(u'I have flown to LA. Now I am flying to Frisco.')
                 for token in doc:
                   print(token.text, utoken.pos_, vtoken.dep_)

                     The script outputs the coarse-grained part-of-speech tags u (see
                 Table 2-1) and dependency labels assigned to the tokens v composing the
                 sample discourse:

                 I         PRON   nsubj
                 have      VERB   aux
                 flown     VERB   ROOT
                 to        ADP    prep




26   Chapter 2
LA     PROPN pobj
.      PUNCT punct
Now    ADV   advmod
I      PRON nsubj
am     VERB aux
flying VERB ROOT
to     ADP   prep
Frisco PROPN pobj
.      PUNCT punct

    But what it doesn’t show you is how words are related to each other in a
sentence by means of the commonly called dependency arcs explained at the
beginning of this section. To look at the dependency arcs in the sample dis-
course, replace the loop in the preceding script with the following one:

for token in doc:
  print(utoken.head.text, token.dep_, token.text)

     The head property of a token object u refers to the syntactic head of
this token. When you print this line, you’ll see how words in the discourse
sentences are connected to each other by syntactic dependencies. If they
were presented graphically, you would see an arc for each line in the fol-
lowing output, except for the ROOT relation. The reason is that the word to
which this label is assigned is the only word in a sentence that doesn’t have
a head:

flown    nsubj I
flown    aux    have
flown    ROOT   flown
flown    prep   to
to       pobj   LA
flown    punct .
flying   advmod Now
flying   nsubj I
flying   aux    am
flying   ROOT   flying
flying   prep   to
to       pobj   Frisco
flying   punct .

    Looking at the earlier list of syntactic dependencies, let’s try to figure
out what labels point to the tokens that could potentially best describe the
customer’s intent: in other words, you need to find a pair that would alone
appropriately describe the customer’s intent.
    You might be interested in the tokens marked with the ROOT and pobj
dependency labels, because in this example they’re key in intent recogni-
tion. As stated earlier, the ROOT label marks the main verb of the sentence,
and pobj, in this example, marks the entity that—in conjunction with the
verb—summarizes the meaning of the entire utterance.



                                                        The Text-Processing Pipeline   27
                      The following script locates words that are assigned those two depen-
                   dency labels:

                   import spacy
                   nlp = spacy.load('en')
                   doc = nlp(u'I have flown to LA. Now I am flying to Frisco.')
                 u for sent in doc.sents:
                  v print([w.text for w in sent wif w.dep_ == 'ROOT' or w.dep_ == 'pobj'])

                        In this script, you shred the discourse u to separate the sentences with
                   the doc.sents property, which iterates over the sentences in the document.
                   Shredding a text into separate sentences can be useful when you need to
                   find, for example, certain parts of speech in each sentence of the discourse.
                   (We’ll discuss doc.sents in the next chapter, where you’ll see an example of
                   how to refer to the tokens in a document with sentence-level indices.) This
                   allows you to create a list of potential keywords for each sentence based on
                   specific dependency labels assigned to the tokens v. The filter conditions
                   used in this example are chosen based on the examination of the syntacti-
                   cally related pairs generated by the previous script. In particular, you pick
                   up the tokens with ROOT and pobj dependency labels w, because these tokens
                   form the pairs you’re interested in.
                        The script’s output should look as follows:

                   ['flown', 'LA']
                   ['flying', 'Frisco']

                       In both sentence pairs, the output nouns are the ones labeled as pobj.
                   You could use this in your ticket booking application to choose the noun
                   that best belongs with the verb. In this case, that would be “flying,” which
                   goes with “Frisco.”
                       This is a simplified example of information extraction using depen-
                   dency labels. In the following chapters, you’ll be given more sophisticated
                   examples of how to iterate over the dependency tree of a sentence or even
                   an entire discourse, extracting necessary pieces of information.

                   Try It Yourself
                   Now that you know how to take advantage of lemmatization, part-of-speech
                   tags, and syntactic dependency labels, you can put them all together to do
                   something useful. Try combining the examples from the preceding sections
                   into a single script that correctly identifies a speaker’s intent to fly to San
                   Francisco.
                       Your script should generate the following output:

                    ['fly', 'San Francisco']

                      To achieve this, start with the latest script from this section and
                   enhance the conditional clause in the loop, adding the conditions to



28   Chapter 2
      account for fine-grained part-of-speech tags, as discussed in “Part-of-Speech
      Tagging” on page 21. Then add the lemmatization functionality to your
      script, as discussed in “Lemmatization” on page 18.

      Named Entity Recognition
      A named entity is a real object that you can refer to by a proper name. It can be
      a person, organization, location, or other entity. Named entities are impor-
      tant in NLP because they reveal the place or organization the user is talking
      about. The following script finds named entities in the sample discourse used
      in the previous examples:

     import spacy
     nlp = spacy.load('en')
     doc = nlp(u'I have flown to LA. Now I am flying to Frisco.')
     for token in doc:
     u if token.ent_type != 0:
         print(token.text, vtoken.ent_type_)

          If the ent_type attribute of a token is not set to 0 u, then the token is
      a named entity. If so, you print the ent_type_ attribute of a token v, which
      contains the type of named entity in unicode. As a result, the script should
      output the following:

      LA       GPE
      Frisco   GPE

          Both LA and Frisco are marked as GPE, the acronym for “geopolitical
      entity” and includes countries, cities, states, and other place names.


Summary
      In this chapter, you set up a working environment for using spaCy. Then
      you learned simple scripts that illustrate how to use spaCy’s features to per-
      form the basic NLP operations for extracting important information. These
      operations included tokenization, lemmatization, and identifying syntactic
      relations between individual tokens in a sentence. The examples provided
      in this chapter are simplified and don’t reflect real-world scenarios. To write
      a more sophisticated script using spaCy, you’ll need to implement an algo-
      rithm to derive the necessary tokens from a dependency tree, using the lin-
      guistic features assigned to tokens. We’ll return to extracting and using
      linguistic features in chapter 4, and we’ll cover dependency trees in detail
      in chapter 6.
          In the next chapter, you’ll look at the key objects of spaCy’s API, includ-
      ing containers and processing pipeline components. Also, you’ll learn to
      use spaCy’s C-level data structures and interfaces to create Python modules
      capable of processing large amounts of text.



                                                               The Text-Processing Pipeline   29
