                  BASIC ELECTROMECHANICAL
                                            9
                           DEVICES


                   In this chapter, we’ll take a look at a sampling
                  of electromechanical devices—components that
                 translate electronic signals into motion and vice
              versa. These devices are instrumental for tasks
       such as automatically switching other circuits on and off,
       playing and capturing sound, and spinning the wheels of
       an RC car.
            As with passive components, the electromechanical category is not especially well
       defined. It is generally understood to include switches and motors, but knob-operated
       potentiometers are more commonly classified as passives (see Chapter 8). It’s best not
       to overthink it. The categories matter only insofar as they help you pass exams and
       browse online catalogs.
            As a matter of practicality, we’ll focus on common electromechanical compo-
       nents that are fundamental to a wide range of electronic devices. More specialized
       sensors or actuators also exist, but they generally operate on the same principles. As
       for complex “computerized” electromechanical sensors, such as accelerometers and
       gyroscopes, we’ll consider them in Chapter 17.


Connectors
       Connectors need little introduction. They’re simple mechanical devices that provide
       temporary coupling between circuits. Compared with permanently soldered wires,
       connectors make electronics easier to transport, reconfigure, and repair.
           A taxonomy of every connector on the market would fill hundreds of pages—
       there’s an endless variety. Some connectors are designed to be compact, others to be
       rugged, and still others to safely handle high currents and voltages. A picture is worth
                   a thousand words, so for an engaging exploration of common designs, I recommend
                   the highly visual book Open Circuits (No Starch Press, 2022). Another way to brush up
                   on connector types is to browse the catalogs of the electronics retailers discussed in
                   the appendix at the end of this book.
                        Despite the wide range of options, we tend to stick to the classics. The most com-
                   mon small connector in use today is probably USB-C; it supports flexible power de-
                   livery and high-speed data transfers between computers and peripherals. Another
                   common type is the tubular barrel plug, still widely used to supply fixed DC voltages
                   to low-power household appliances. Many readers will also recognize the various sizes
                   of audio jacks for wired headphones, speakers, and microphones.
                        Inside electronic devices, we frequently encounter so-called headers—rows of metal
                   pins on a 1.27 mm or 2.54 mm grid that mate with similarly shaped plastic receptacles.
                   It’s also common to see wire-to-board connectors that clip or crimp onto cables. Finally,
                   compact electronics also use delicate, amber-colored flexible printed circuit (FPC) strips
                   providing internal connections to displays, touchscreens, keypads, and so forth.
                        On the workbench, you’ll find BNC connectors for signal generators and oscillo-
                   scope probes, along with single-conductor banana plugs used with multimeters and lab
                   power supplies.
                        The side of a connector with exposed prongs or that slides into a receptacle is
                   commonly called male; the other side is termed female. The words plug and socket re-
                   fer to cable-side and device-side connections, respectively. Finally, jack is somewhat
                   ambiguous, with different meanings in different parts of the world. Figure 9-1 shows
                   several ways of representing sockets and plugs on circuit schematics.




                   Figure 9-1: Some of the ways to draw connectors

                       The styles range from simple boxes to more elaborate visual metaphors. You can
                   choose any approach you like, but make sure your drawings are unambiguous: Always
                   include pin numbers or labels, and make the connector appear as a distinct, logical
                   whole.


      Switches
                   Switches should be familiar to any reader who has ever turned on a light or used a
                   vending machine. These devices open or close electrical connections in response to a
                   mechanical action, such as flipping a rocker, pushing a button, or turning a knob.
                        As with connectors, we could spend hours discussing the many form factors and
                   styles of switches. There are miniature tactile (dome) switches that can be mounted
                   directly onto a printed circuit board to function as reset buttons, simple keypads, and
                   so on. There are also elevator-style illuminated pushbuttons, slide switches, rocker
                   switches, paddle switches, and many others. Instead of rattling off all the options, let’s
                   focus on what can’t be grokked from catalog photos alone.

130    Chapter 9
Electrical Ratings and Architecture
Every switch is rated for a particular current and voltage. If the current limit is signifi-
cantly exceeded for more than a split second, the contacts may overheat and possibly
weld together. Exceeding the voltage limit usually has less dramatic consequences,
but excessive sparking—which can occur briefly even in low-voltage circuits when dis-
connecting a large inductive load—can cause premature wear. At sufficiently high volt-
ages, sustained electrical arcing could also become a concern.
     In practice, miniature tactile switches may be rated for as little as 20 to 50 mA
at 12 V; small slide switches are commonly designed to handle at least 300 mA; and
larger panel-mounted rocker switches can usually carry between 5 and 20 A at 250 V.
When the component’s dimensions allow, these ratings are typically stamped on the
side of the switch.
     Current and voltage limits aside, switches are also distinguished by their mechan-
ical action. A switch is said to have a momentary action if it stays in position only while
an external force is applied. In contrast, latching or sustained action means that the
mechanism stays in position until toggled back. A doorbell is a typical example of a
momentary switch, while a wall-mounted light switch is a common sustained type.
Most momentary switches are normally open (NO), but normally closed (NC) variants
are also available from some manufacturers for specialized applications.
     Another distinguishing feature of a switch is the number of poles. Each pole is
a separate electrical circuit operated by a common mechanical assembly—essentially
multiple units ganged together. Most switches have a single pole (SP), although double-
pole (DP) mechanisms are sometimes used in outdoor lighting, motor control, and
similar applications. Higher pole counts (3P, 4P, 5P, and so on) are fairly rare, partly
because few applications require toggling five completely separate circuits at once.
     The number of poles is often cited together with the number of throws. A throw
refers to the set of electrical paths through which the mechanism cycles. A single-
throw (ST) switch still has two positions—since a one-position switch would be useless—
but it provides a single on/off path between two terminals, possibly repeated for each
switch unit in a multi-pole assembly. A double-throw (DT) mechanism can toggle each
pole between two electrical paths; for example, in a single-pole double-throw switch
with three terminals labeled A, B, and C, the connection might alternate between A-B
and A-C.
     Switches with three or more throws—and thus three or more positions—are uncom-
mon, but they crop up in some household appliances. For example, an old-fashioned
fan may use a 3T switch to select among three motor speeds (low, medium, and high).
Figure 9-2 shows some of the most common schematic symbols for switches.




Figure 9-2: Schematic symbols for switches

    In the third panel (DPST), note the use of a dashed line to indicate a mechanical
linkage between the two electrically separate paths in a single package.




                                                                Basic Electromechanical Devices   131
                  Switch Bounce
                  If you pry open a typical switch, you’ll probably find that its internals are quite com-
                  plex. Inside, there might be a small spring-loaded roller that travels over a tiny hump
                  or an intricately shaped metal leaf that “pops” when pressed firmly enough. The pur-
                  pose of these mechanisms is to keep the switch firmly in place until sufficient force
                  is applied, at which point it snaps immediately into the new position. This nonlinear
                  behavior provides satisfying tactile feedback, reduces sensitivity to vibration and other
                  accidental inputs, and prevents the switch from resting in any state other than “fully
                  off” or “fully on.”
                       The flip side of this approach is that once the mechanism gives in, things happen
                  quickly: The contacts are pulled apart or slammed together at a considerable speed.
                  Because metal is elastic, this motion produces some vibration that manifests as electri-
                  cal glitches lasting from tens of microseconds to a few milliseconds (Figure 9-3). The
                  effect is known as switch bounce.




                  Figure 9-3: A fairly typical pattern of switch bounce when a switch goes from on to off

                      The glitches are imperceptible to humans and inconsequential in most analog
                  applications, but they last an eternity from the perspective of a digital chip. If the
                  bounce pattern isn’t taken into account, embedded computers can misread a single
                  input as a series of independent key presses, producing confusing results and sending
                  novice circuit designers on a wild-goose chase.
                      In earlier days, we used to incorporate electronic filters to suppress high-frequency
                  switch noise before it reached a high-speed chip. Nowadays, the problem is more com-
                  monly handled in software. In most cases, requiring around 10 milliseconds to pass
                  between successive inputs is enough to filter out switch bounce without adding any
                  human-perceptible lag.


                  Switch-Based Sensors
                  Switches are a common building block for simple sensors. For example, reed switches,
                  used in home security systems, contain a permanent magnet and are activated by
                  bringing another magnet nearby. Similarly, mechanical thermostats use a bimetallic
                  strip that deflects in response to changes in temperature, bringing contacts together
                  or moving them apart.

132   Chapter 9
             Another interesting type of sensor in this category is the incremental rotary encoder.
        As the name implies, rotary encoders convert rotation into electrical signals; their
        applications range from car radio volume knobs to position sensors in industrial ma-
        chinery. In such uses, they serve as longer-lasting alternatives to delicate potentiome-
        ters. The downside is that encoders output pulses, not analog readings, so the signal
        needs to be interpreted by an embedded computer to convert the pulses into angular
        position.
             Rotary encoders can be constructed in a number of ways, but the simplest version
        consists of two stationary pins that glide across a rotating, rosette-shaped conductive
        disk. Because the pins are slightly offset, the order in which they contact the disk can
        be used to infer the direction of rotation (Figure 9-4). Meanwhile, the frequency of
        the generated pulses represents the rotation speed.




        Figure 9-4: A conceptual illustration of a simple rotary encoder

            There’s no well-established schematic symbol for this class of devices. Compo-
        nents that don’t have dedicated symbols are often illustrated as blank boxes with a
        descriptive label on the side. That said, some authors may opt to include additional
        visual cues of their choice.


Simple Magnetic Actuators
        In Chapter 6, we noted that the flow of electricity through a coil of wire can produce
        a coherent magnetic field. This field can attract or repel permanent magnets, and
        it can also more weakly attract ferromagnetic materials that don’t produce coherent
        magnetic fields of their own but contain microscopic, reorientable magnetic domains
        in the crystal lattice. The materials that exhibit this property include iron, cobalt,
        nickel, and some grades of steel.
             A coil of wire used to attract metals is known as an electromagnet. An electromag-
        net can be used on its own—for example, to sort scrap metal—but it’s more common
        to combine it with a captive plunger that’s pushed or pulled by the field. This con-
        traption, usually referred to as a solenoid, can be found in some electronically con-
        trolled door locks, hydraulic valves, and vintage pinball machines.
             The coil of a typical electromagnet consists of very thin wire wrapped around the
        electromagnet hundreds or thousands of times. This construction serves two pur-
        poses. First, it maximizes the strength of the resulting magnetic field. Second, the


                                                                           Basic Electromechanical Devices   133
                  length of the conductor gives the coil substantial resistance, limiting the current to a
                  safe maximum at the rated supply voltage. Most electromagnets can be operated at
                  higher voltages to deliver more punch, but the duty cycle must be short to allow the
                  coils to cool down.
                       Solenoids are a niche product, but they share their operating principle with two
                  additional common electronic components: speakers and relays.


                  Speakers
                  A speaker is a solenoid with a twist: Instead of a fixed coil that actuates a plunger,
                  there’s a permanent magnet affixed to the frame and an electromagnet coil mounted
                  on a lightweight diaphragm made of paper or plastic. Because of the great difference
                  in mass, the coil doesn’t move the magnet. Instead, it moves itself back and forth in
                  response to the applied current. This motion also moves the diaphragm in a similar
                  fashion. Because the diaphragm has a fairly large surface area, it scoops up a decent
                  volume of air and produces audible sound waves (Figure 9-5).




                  Figure 9-5: The internals of a simple speaker

                       Like solenoids, speakers are designed with a nominal coil resistance, usually 8 Ω,
                  although 4 Ω and 16 Ω coils aren’t unheard of. Another key parameter is the maxi-
                  mum continuous power rating. For small speakers, this usually falls between 250 mW
                  and 2 W; home audio components may be rated for 50 W or more. As expected, ex-
                  ceeding the rating risks overheating the coil.
                       Acoustically, speakers are complicated beasts. Size matters: Small diaphragms
                  have less inertia, and small coils have less inductance, so compact units reproduce
                  high-frequency sounds more effectively. On the flip side, tiny speakers can’t move
                  a whole lot of air, so they can’t deliver good low-frequency rumble. This problem
                  can be mitigated to some extent by electronically boosting some audio frequencies
                  and attenuating others (see Chapter 12). Still, the hi-fi solution is to spend a bit more
                  money and have multiple speakers of different designs working together.
                       To get a sense of how speakers work and how well they handle different frequen-
                  cies, you can try hooking up a small speaker to a function generator. Crank up the
                  voltage to 5 to 10 V, and then try outputting sine waves at different frequencies;

134   Chapter 9
around 1 kHz is a sensible starting point. Note how the apparent loudness changes
with frequency. Some of this reflects the nature of human hearing, but you will also
notice marked differences between speakers of different sizes. Next, check out square
waves. They should sound much louder due to their fast-rising and fast-falling edges,
but the sound will also have a much harsher, tinnier quality.
    You can also connect the speaker to an oscilloscope and see what happens if you
speak into it or push the diaphragm with your finger. You should see AC voltages
across the terminals. We’ll discuss why this happens shortly.


Relays
A relay is a solenoid-operated switch. Like normal switches, relays can have a vary-
ing number of poles and throws. Most relays feature momentary switching action,
though several varieties of latching mechanisms are also available. The devices range
from miniature models used in precision electronic instruments to fist-sized contactors
found in high-voltage appliances, such as whole-house generators and air condition-
ers. Figure 9-6 shows some common schematic symbols for relays and speakers.




Figure 9-6: Symbols for relays and speakers

    If you have a miniature non-latching relay and a capacitor in the vicinity of 100 μF,
there’s an interesting experiment you can conduct (Figure 9-7).




Figure 9-7: An experiment with a miniature relay (bottom view)

     The circuit uses a DPDT relay made by Kemet and labeled EC2-4.5NU. Other re-
lays might have a different pinout, but most of them should work fine if the necessary
wiring adjustments are made.
     Once the circuit is connected to a 4 to 5 V supply at 500 mA, the relay should
start clicking at a frequency of several hertz. See if you can figure out why—connecting
an oscilloscope to the leads of the capacitor may help.

                                                                 Basic Electromechanical Devices   135
                        If you’re stumped, note that when first powered on, there’s a connection between
                  the negative supply, the capacitor, and the bottom relay control pin. The capacitor
                  quickly charges, and the relay is energized. After a brief moment for the mechanism
                  to move, this interrupts the connection and opens the circuit. The relay doesn’t turn
                  off immediately because of the energy stored in the capacitor. Only after the capac-
                  itor sufficiently discharges does the electromagnet release, and the cycle restarts.
                  We’ve constructed a very simple electromechanical oscillator.
                        Relays are among the oldest electronic components that can be harnessed for dig-
                  ital computation. They’ve been used to construct some of the earliest computers and
                  telephony systems in the world. Still, the devices suffer from three significant limi-
                  tations. First, their switching speed is limited by the time it takes for a mass to travel
                  from one position to another. Second, the components are fairly power-hungry—even
                  the most efficient miniature relays require around 30 mA just to hold in place. Above
                  all, relays are prone to mechanical wear and fail after far fewer cycles than a transis-
                  tor would. They keep working for decades in devices such as wall thermostats, where
                  they’re actuated only several times a day, but if we upped this to several times per sec-
                  ond, the relay would probably be toast within a month.


      Motors
                  Whereas solenoids produce single nudges, motors are designed to convert electric en-
                  ergy into continuous motion. This can be achieved in a couple of ways, but the most
                  practical approach uses an arrangement of electromagnets to spin a metal shaft. The
                  rotating shaft can then be coupled to gears, timing belts, hydraulic pumps, rack-and-
                  pinion mechanisms, and much more.
                       The usual design of a small DC motor features a combination of permanent
                  magnets and electromagnet coils. If the electromagnets are built into the rotor, as in
                  Figure 9-8, the permanent magnets are integrated with the motor frame (the stator).
                  It’s also possible to reverse this arrangement.




                  Figure 9-8: The structure of a brushed DC motor

                       Regardless of the layout, the idea is to energize the electromagnets in a way that
                  pulls the rotor toward one of the stationary magnets. Then, just as the poles start
                  to align, we break the circuit and send the current to another coil, making the rotor



136   Chapter 9
want to move to another configuration that requires turning farther along. We keep
doing this to achieve the electromagnetic version of a dog forever chasing its own tail.


Brushed DC Motors
In a typical brushed motor like the one shown in Figure 9-8, the switching of coils on
the rotor is accomplished by a mechanical device known as a commutator. The commu-
tator consists of a circular pattern of copper contacts mounted on the rotor and two
smooth, conductive brushes affixed to the motor frame. This energizes different coils
depending on the angular position of the rotor assembly.
     High-speed DC motors exhibit an interesting property: They don’t use more
power than necessary. From Chapter 6, recall that if the current flowing through
an inductor (a coil) is changing, some of the energy is soaked up by a magnetic field.
This manifests as a momentary pushback voltage that’s proportional to the rate of
change in the supplied current.
     Importantly, the effect works both ways. If the magnetic field is changing for
some external reason—for example, because the coil is spinning near a permanent
magnet—electrons in the coil are pushed around and a voltage develops. This is what
we observed with a manually actuated speaker, and it’s what happens in a motor. The
faster the rotor turns, the greater the rate of change of the magnetic field acting on
the coils and thus the higher the pushback voltage. This phenomenon, known in mo-
tor design as back electromotive force (back EMF), eventually reaches an equilibrium with
the supply voltage. At that point, the rotor stops accelerating, and the device admits
only as much current as needed to make up for friction and other energy losses. Yet,
as soon as the rotor is connected to a load and starts spinning more slowly, back EMF
is reduced, allowing more current to flow.
     Because of this desirable property, there’s some nuance to parsing the specs of
brushed motors. Motors are advertised based on their RPM and torque, but you can
never get the maximum of both. Without load, the motor spins fastest, but the available
torque is zero—it can muster only enough energy to keep the rotor itself running at
that speed. To get maximum torque, you must make back EMF disappear—and that
happens only at stall. Between these extremes lies a roughly linear relationship among
speed, torque, and current. For example, if you want to spin something at 80 percent
of the motor’s no-load RPM, you must settle for about 20 percent of the advertised stall
torque. On the upside, you only need to supply roughly 20 percent of the stall current
given in the motor spec.


Brushless DC Motors
Unlike their brushed counterparts, brushless DC motors (BLDCs) don’t rely on mechan-
ical commutation to switch current to the coils; they use electronic switching instead.
Brushless designs are meant to overcome the disadvantages of brushed motors, such
as relatively noisy operation and the tendency for brushes to wear. BLDCs can also
be made lighter and more compact by making the control circuitry sense overload
and kill power in a matter of milliseconds. In a brushed motor, the windings must be
made bulky enough to survive stall currents indefinitely—or at least long enough for
the operator to react or a fuse to blow.
     Figure 9-9 shows some typical schematic symbols for motors. The left panel of
the figure shows the usual symbol for a two-terminal motor. In a DC circuit, this mo-
tor would be brushed. There’s no consistent symbol for BLDCs, but some common
choices are shown on the right.


                                                               Basic Electromechanical Devices   137
                   Figure 9-9: Common schematic symbols for motors

                        Constructing the control circuit for an electronically switched motor isn’t trivial.
                   Without knowing the position of the rotor, we might end up switching the coils too
                   slowly or too quickly for the load. The former would result in jerky motion and exces-
                   sive power consumption, and the latter would make the rotor lose steps and helplessly
                   flail around.
                        Stepper motors were an early solution to this problem—or more precisely, an elec-
                   tronically simple solution to a related use case of actuating precision mechanisms at
                   lower speeds. These motors have a high number of coils and magnet poles, producing
                   relatively smooth motion without requiring perfectly timed coil switching. Further,
                   they are meant to be operated at low RPM so that there is no need to adjust switching
                   speed for loads that stay within the motor’s spec.
                        Stepper motors usually run no faster than several hundred rotations per minute—
                   about two orders of magnitude slower than a brushed motor of a comparable size. The
                   benefits of back EMF largely disappear, so steppers are essentially constant-current
                   devices, power-hungry even when not doing any useful work. Still, their simplicity,
                   near silence, and precise angular positioning—due to the high number of coils—make
                   them valuable in mains-powered equipment. For example, most hobby 3D printers use
                   them for positioning.
                        A refinement of this concept is the modern brushless DC motor, which incor-
                   porates some form of position sensing. A reliable method uses a magnetic Hall effect
                   sensor that detects small disturbances in the flow of current through a semiconductor
                   substrate when a magnet passes nearby. A cheaper but more complex alternative is
                   to monitor the current flowing through the motor coils; the amount of back EMF is
                   proportional to rotor speed, so rudimentary coil timing corrections can be done by
                   monitoring how successful the power supply is at pushing electrons through the device.
                        A BLDC motor has at least three terminals for the coils. Because these coils need
                   to be energized in a specific, carefully timed sequence, an external digital controller is
                   almost always necessary. However, as noted earlier, the motors themselves are lighter,
                   quieter, and more durable than their brushed counterparts, so they find use in per-
                   formance gear, ranging from high-end drones to premium battery-operated workshop
                   tools.


      Piezoelectric Crystals
                   Piezoelectric crystals are electronic components made from substances that change di-
                   mensions in response to an applied electric field. This might sound somewhat mysti-
                   fying, so to understand this phenomenon, let’s start by having another look at a more
                   familiar component: the capacitor.




138    Chapter 9
     Consider a simple capacitor consisting of two metal plates and an inert insulator
sandwiched in between. In Chapter 1, we noted that dissimilar charges attract, so in a
charged capacitor, there must be an attractive force between the plates that’s propor-
tional to the applied voltage. This force is quite strong; it squishes the insulator layer,
changing the dimensions of the device to some microscopic extent.
     This relationship goes both ways. If we put a charged capacitor in a vise and apply
external mechanical force, this brings the plates closer together, increasing capaci-
tance (C). In Chapter 5, we established that capacitance is equal to charge (Q) divided
by voltage (V); if C increases and Q remains the same, the voltage across the terminals
of a mechanically squished capacitor must drop.
     In real capacitors, this effect is usually negligible, but a special class of insulators—
piezoelectrics—amplifies it through permanently aligned electric dipoles. These crys-
tals, when squeezed, can produce sufficient voltage swings to give off sparks, so they’re
used as igniters in cigarette lighters and some gas appliances. In the same vein, al-
though their dimensions change too little for general-purpose speakers, the crystals
can generate high-intensity ultrasound or high-pitched beeps in smoke alarms. This is
the operating principle of piezoelectric transducers.
     Beyond fire-starting and noise-making, the most common use of these materials
is as timing devices in modern electronics, from wall clocks to radios to computers.
The resulting timing component is simply called a crystal or quartz (hence “quartz
watch”). To explain the design, we can lean on the analogy of a playground swing.
You’d be right to treat such analogies with suspicion, but in this instance, we’re deal-
ing with mechanical oscillations, so the comparison is apt.
     A swing has a natural resonant frequency: If you give it a gentle push, it moves
away a tiny bit and then comes back after a while. If you time the next push correctly,
the amplitude of motion increases; if you time it incorrectly, it doesn’t. The same is
true for a piezoelectric crystal. We can set it in motion with electrical nudges, and if
the frequency of the nudges matches the physics of the crystal, the amplitude of the
oscillations will grow. It’s possible to design a circuit that zeros in on maximum signal
amplitude and thus naturally settles at the crystal’s resonant frequency. This works
because, as noted earlier, the phenomenon is bidirectional: Mechanical oscillations
induced by small nudges eventually begin to manifest as measurable voltage swings.
     Figure 9-10 shows the response of a crystal trimmed to a natural resonant fre-
quency of 2 MHz. In the top portion of the plot, we can see that as the nudges from
a signal generator approach the resonant frequency of the crystal, the number of elec-
trons moving back and forth increases. This tells us that mechanical oscillations are
increasing in amplitude, sympathetically pushing charges back and forth. At precisely
2 MHz, we notice a dip in impedance, meaning the admitted back-and-forth current is
at its peak in relation to the constant-amplitude driving voltage.




                                                                  Basic Electromechanical Devices   139
                  Figure 9-10: Real-world behavior of a 2 MHz crystal

                        In the same plot, we see that if the driving frequency is slightly higher than 2 MHz,
                  the impedance briefly spikes. This is the anti-resonant frequency. The spike is most
                  easily explained with the swing analogy: If you push too early—while the swing is still
                  moving toward you—you’re not helping at all. Instead, you’re removing energy from
                  the system and forcing the swing to stop.
                        One difference between a swing and a piezoelectric crystal is that in electronic
                  circuits, we usually don’t drive the crystal with discrete pulses. Instead, we use a con-
                  tinuous sine wave. At the resonant frequency, the driving signal and the motion of
                  the crystal are perfectly in sync, so there’s no phase shift between the input voltage
                  and the resulting current (Figure 9-10, bottom half). At most other frequencies, the
                  crystal isn’t resonating, so we’re looking at two pieces of metal with an insulator in
                  between—a run-of-the-mill capacitor with its associated –90° phase lag. However, in
                  the narrow range of frequencies—the “active braking” region between resonance and
                  anti-resonance—the phase shift is flipped around. I’ll spare you the math that explains
                  it, since the phenomenon is relevant to just one circuit design: a particularly mini-
                  malistic oscillator we’ll review in Chapter 23. If you’re curious, though, exploring a
                  discrete-time model should offer good insights.
                        In this day and age, it might seem odd that we’re still using mechanical devices as
                  timing sources. The reason is simple: They work exceptionally well. The specific res-
                  onant frequency of a crystal can be laser-trimmed during the manufacturing process
                  with an accuracy measured in parts per million. Equally important, the frequency re-
                  mains stable over time. Even better performance can be achieved by controlling for
                  temperature, either with bundled sensors or with a miniature PCB-mounted “oven”
                  housing the crystal.
                        Crystals are commonly available for frequencies between 2 and 60 MHz or so. A
                  separate range of slow crystals, tuned to 32.768 kHz, serves applications such as low-
                  power real-time clocks. Figure 9-11 shows symbols for piezoelectric elements and our
                  next subject, microphones.



140   Chapter 9
       Figure 9-11: Symbols for piezoelectric elements and microphones

            Apart from crystals, there’s also a competing range of micro-electromechanical sys-
       tem (MEMS) devices that are manufactured by etching the resonant structure directly
       onto silicon, alongside the other components needed for an electronic oscillator. The
       advantage of this relatively new process is space savings, so MEMS oscillators can be
       found in smartphones and other highly miniaturized electronics where every square
       millimeter counts. Still, it’s just a spin on the same theme, and when size isn’t the
       overriding concern, piezoelectric crystals currently perform equally well or better at
       lower cost.
            There’s not much we can do with a crystal just yet, but as noted earlier, we’ll re-
       visit practical timing circuits in Chapter 23.


Microphones
       In this chapter, we’ve discussed two ways of making noise: speakers and piezoelectric
       transducers. In principle, both can be used in reverse to capture sound waves, but
       they aren’t particularly good at that. Conventional piezoelectric elements don’t have
       sufficient movement range to capture low frequencies. A speaker performs better—
       the coil produces back EMF voltage if moved by air pressure across a wide range of
       frequencies—but the component is needlessly bulky and fragile for this use.
            Instead, to record audio, we typically use a device called a condenser or electret
       microphone. The design consists of a permanently charged membrane—the electret—
       made of plastic in which an electrostatic charge is trapped during the manufacturing
       process. This membrane forms one plate of a capacitor; when it vibrates in response
       to sound, its motion relative to the other plate induces the movement of electrons.
       This resembles our earlier discussion of how squishing or stretching a ceramic capaci-
       tor produces swings in the voltage across its terminals.
            In Chapter 2, we introduced field-effect transistors as voltage-controlled elec-
       tronic valves in which the voltage applied to the gate moderates the flow of current
       between the two remaining terminals. In a condenser microphone, the second plate
       of the capacitor is connected to the FET gate. The induced microscopic currents
       change the gate voltage, so the current admitted through the transistor’s main con-
       duction channel changes accordingly.
            As with piezoelectric crystals, the traditional design is facing some competition
       from the newfangled MEMS manufacturing process. MEMS microphones use active
       circuitry to detect the motion of a micromachined structure—typically a suspended
       membrane-shaped capacitor. As of this writing, MEMS microphones lack exceptional
       acoustic specs, but their small size and compatibility with industrial reflow soldering
       make them attractive for applications such as smartphones and hearing aids. For ev-
       eryone else, electrets are still fine.
            The electrical ratings of electret microphones are usually straightforward. The
       component can often tolerate a wide range of voltages across its terminals. For MEMS

                                                                         Basic Electromechanical Devices   141
                  models, the active circuitry requires a more precise supply regulation, but the electri-
                  cal side remains uncomplicated. The more important consideration is acoustic perfor-
                  mance. Every microphone has a specific spatial pickup pattern, which can be plotted
                  by spinning a sound source around the device under test. Like speakers, microphones
                  also have a frequency response curve that should ideally remain flat across the audible
                  spectrum, from 20 Hz to 15 kHz. Electrets typically come close to this ideal, but for
                  hi-fi applications, it’s always wise to check.
                       So far, we have covered the easy stuff. However, the most important acoustic pa-
                  rameters are sensitivity and noise performance, and to make sense of these specs, we
                  regrettably need to talk about decibels.


                  Deciphering Decibels
                  In electronics and some adjacent disciplines, we often compare magnitudes. Differ-
                  ences in magnitude can become large, so we need shorthand to avoid spelling out that
                  a quantity has changed by a factor of, say, 1,000,000.
                       A simple solution is to use exponents: We can write 1,000,000 as 106 , take the base
                  of the multiplier (10) as a given, and then use a keyword to indicate that we’re talking
                  only about the exponent of the multiplier. For example, we could call 106 an increase
                  of 6 “clerts.” In the same vein, a decrease by a factor of 10,000 could henceforth be
                  known as –4 clerts. This notation also simplifies some circuit math. For example, if
                  we have a long cable that attenuates signals by x clerts and another by y clerts, the
                  combined clert effect is a simple sum, because 10x · 10 y = 10 x+y .
                       Alas, the clert is made-up; the decibel (dB) is real. More precisely, the original
                  pseudo-unit is the bel. The bel works much like our clert: +1 bel is a tenfold increase,
                  while –2 bels is a decrease by a factor of 100. So far so good. But there’s a twist: The
                  bel was originally designed specifically for measuring power. Recall from Chapter 3
                  that power sometimes has a quadratic relationship to applied voltage. Specifically, for
                  purely resistive loads, we have Joule’s law: P = V 2 / R.
                       Seeing this, someone decided that 1 bel should always represent a hypothetical
                  tenfold increase in power, even when applied to another base unit and even without
                  resistive loads present. This means that if you’re talking about watts, +1 bel is an in-
                  crease of 10×, but √if you’re talking about volts, you’re supposed to interpret +1 bel
                  as an increase of 10× (circa 3.1622×). This ensures that squaring the voltage later
                  yields the correct power via Joule’s law. For other units, where the relationship to
                  power is less obvious than for volts, figuring out which kind of bel you’re supposed
                  to be using can be a major headache.
                       The weirdness doesn’t end there. At some point, we decided that the bel is too
                  big to use—but only slightly so. Instead of putting up with the occasional fraction or
                  switching to another base for the exponent, we divided the bel into 10 steps, hence
                  decibel. In effect, we started raising 10 to fractional powers, producing irrational
                  per-decibel multipliers.
                               √ 1/10        For power, 1 decibel is a multiplier of 101/10 ≈ 1.258925; for
                  voltage, it’s 10        = 101/20 ≈ 1.122018. In all cases, 0 dB means a multiplier of
                  1—signifying no change.
                       The original bel is gone; we now use decibels exclusively.


                  Quantifying Microphone Sensitivity and Noise
                  Knowing the meaning of the decibel isn’t enough. When someone uses the term, we
                  also need to know the base unit and the reference point they have in mind. In acous-
                  tics, decibels are used to measure sound level; 0 dB is the loudness of a 1 kHz acoustic


142   Chapter 9
        wave that’s calibrated to exert 20 micropascals of pressure. This is roughly the thresh-
        old of human hearing.
             From this 0 dB origin, we can derive several acoustic scales. One popular choice
        measures the absolute sound pressure level with no regard to frequency, often de-
        noted as dB SPL. Other scales can be weighted to mimic human hearing, typically
        peaking at 3 kHz and then tapering sharply below 200 Hz and above 10 kHz. The
        hearing-weighted loudness scale is typically denoted as dBA.
             In a microphone spec sheet, the sensitivity might be given as –45 dB. This isn’t an
        acoustic decibel: Here, the base unit is volts (dBV). The zero point on the scale is a
        theoretical microphone that would output 1 VRMS in response to a reference acoustic
        wave. If your head is spinning already, it gets worse: The reference sound isn’t 0 dBA
        but a 94 dB squeal at 1 kHz, roughly the loudness of a gas-powered lawnmower. If a
        microphone has a sensitivity of –45 dBV, it means the lawnmower-induced swing is
        45 (voltage) decibels lower: 1 VRMS · 10-45/20 ≈ 6 mVRMS .
             Needless to say, you don’t need to memorize all this detail. I’m just giving you a
        quick overview in case you need to figure out how the numbers in the spec translate
        into the voltages on the oscilloscope screen.
             Sensitivity aside, another important characteristic of a microphone is its noise
        floor. There are two ways to measure it, but the more common approach is the signal-
        to-noise ratio (SNR). If the SNR is given as 60 dB, it means there’s 60 decibels of head-
        room between the noise floor and the aforementioned 94 dB lawnmower reference
        point. In more logical terms, this means that the internal “hiss” contributed by the
        electronics of the microphone is equivalent to a 94 dB – 60 dB = 34 dBA source of
        static noise placed in the vicinity of an ideal microphone. This is known as equivalent
        input noise (EIN) and is a more reasonable, if less common, way to report microphone
        performance. A positive EIN means the hiss is louder than the threshold of human
        hearing; 34 dBA is enough to drown out whispering or nature sounds.
             An average electret microphone might have –45 dBV sensitivity and an SNR of
        60 dBA. Spending $2 more will get you a top-of-the-line module with –25 dBV sen-
        sitivity and an SNR of 80 dBA. For low-fidelity applications, such as gaming head-
        sets, this doesn’t matter. For everything else, a good microphone makes a dramatic
        difference. If you’re curious, you can listen to a quick demo at the following URL:
        http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/slc/mic-compare.

 NOTE   The astute reader may have picked up that I’m not a fan of decibels. Although exponent nota-
        tion is useful, this particular flavor of it is a source of needless pain. Suffixes help, but their
        landscape is chaotic too. In communications, for example, dBm references 1 milliwatt, but
        dBµ denotes 1 microvolt; in other disciplines, the same acronyms may mean something else.
        We can’t escape decibels entirely, but apart from component specs, we won’t be leaning on them
        throughout the book.

Circuit Protection Components
        Circuit protection devices (Figure 9-12) are electromechanical only in the loosest
        sense: They’re meant to “pop” before a more expensive portion of the circuit catches
        fire. Still, we need a place to discuss them briefly. If you squint your eyes, the blowing
        of a fuse can be seen as an act of electromechanical sacrifice.




                                                                               Basic Electromechanical Devices   143
                  Figure 9-12: Symbols for circuit protection devices

                       Fundamentally, a fuse is a current-protection device. It serves two functions. First,
                  it shields equipment from transient overloads (for example, an unexpected motor
                  stall). Equally important, it protects surroundings from electrical malfunctions caused
                  by internal short circuits. An unchecked short could ignite flammable plastics if the
                  device overheats.
                       Basic fuses consist of a strip of (slightly) resistive material and essentially exploit
                  the squared term in one form of Joule’s law: P = I 2 R. They generate manageable heat
                  up to a certain current (I), but the material melts quickly—interrupting the circuit—if
                  that threshold is exceeded.
                       A more user-friendly variant of this approach is the breaker, a latching switch that
                  releases automatically if the current exceeds a certain threshold. Small pushbutton
                  breakers, found on some appliances and power strips, are usually thermal and work
                  like thermostats. Larger breakers use a solenoid that pulls a linkage if the current
                  flowing through the breaker is higher than it’s supposed to be.
                       Simple fuses are necessarily somewhat approximate. They trip quickly if the cur-
                  rent is completely out of whack, but they might tolerate as much as 150 percent of
                  their rated current for minutes or even hours. This can be a curse or a blessing. Some
                  fuses are deliberately designed to have a higher thermal mass to withstand current
                  surges when, for example, a large motor is spooling up. Reputable manufacturers
                  provide detailed response curves for their products, so you can pick the right fuse for
                  your needs.
                       In addition to traditional fuses and breakers, we have resettable fuses, also known
                  as polyfuses or (more generically) thermistors. Once again, these devices are designed
                  to be heated by the flow of current through a resistive material. A positive temperature
                  coefficient (PTC) thermistor consists of conductive particles embedded in a noncon-
                  ductive substrate that expands with temperature and eventually pulls the conductive
                  particles apart. This typically reduces—but does not interrupt—current flow until the
                  fuse is allowed to cool.
                       The last circuit protection devices on our list are metal-oxide varistors (MOVs). Un-
                  like fuses, they’re meant to protect the device not against current but against voltage
                  spikes that may follow lightning strikes, downed power lines, and so on. MOVs are
                  made of ceramic materials with a carefully controlled breakdown voltage. The com-
                  ponents usually straddle mains supply lines and are supposed to act as a crowbar if
                  the voltage gets too high. If tripped, they tend to explode rather spectacularly. The
                  hope is just that the MOV’s fiery death gives enough time for the fault to clear or a
                  standard fuse to take notice and trip.
                       Leaving passives and electromechanical devices in the rearview mirror, we’re now
                  ready to enter the kingdom of semiconducting devices.




144   Chapter 9
