                               5
         Tr an sfo r m i n g S hapes
             with G eo m etry
                  In the teahouse one day Nasrudin announced he was
            selling his house. When the other patrons asked him to describe
                it, he brought out a brick. “It’s just a collection of these.”
                                      —Idries Shah


             In geometry class, everything you learn
            about involves dimensions in space using
           shapes. You typically start by examining
       one-dimensional lines and two-dimensional
circles, squares, or triangles, then move on to three-
dimensional objects like spheres and cubes. These
days, creating geometric shapes is easy with technology
and free software, though manipulating and changing
the shapes you create can be more of a challenge.
     In this chapter, you’ll learn how to manipulate and transform geomet-
ric shapes using the Processing graphics package. You’ll start with basic
shapes like circles and triangles, which will allow you to work with compli-
cated shapes like fractals and cellular automata in later chapters. You will
also learn how to break down some complicated-looking designs into simple
components.
    Drawing a Circle
                Let’s start with a simple one-dimensional circle. Open a new sketch in
                Processing and save it as geometry.pyde. Then enter the code in Listing 5-1
                to create a circle on the screen.

geometry.pyde   def setup():
                    size(600,600)

                def draw():
                    ellipse(200,100,20,20)

                Listing 5-1: Drawing a circle

                     Before we draw the shape, we first define the size of our sketchbook,
                known as the coordinate plane. In this example, we use the size() function to
                say that our grid will be 600 pixels wide and 600 pixels tall.
                     With our coordinate plane set up, we then use the drawing function
                ellipse() to create our circle on this plane. The first two parameters, 200
                and 100, show where the center of the circle is located. Here, 200 is the
                x-coordinate and the second number, 100, is the y-coordinate of this circle’s
                center, which places it at (200,100) on the plane.
                     The last two parameters determine the width and height of the shape in
                pixels. In the example, the shape is 20 pixels wide and 20 pixels tall. Because
                the two parameters are the same, it means that the points on the circumfer-
                ence are equidistant from the center, forming a perfectly round circle.
                     Click the Run button (it looks like a play symbol), and a new window
                with a small circle should open, like in Figure 5-1.




                Figure 5-1: The output of Listing 5-1 showing a small circle




78   Chapter 5
         Processing has a number of functions you can use to draw shapes.
     Check out the full list at https://processing.org/reference/ to explore other
     shape functions.
         Now that you know how to draw a circle in Processing, you’re almost
     ready to use these simple shapes to create dynamic, interactive graphics.
     In order to do that, you’ll first need to learn about location and transfor-
     mations. Let’s start with location.


Specifying Location Using Coordinates
     In Listing 5-1, we used the first two parameters of the ellipse() function
     to specify our circle’s location on the grid. Likewise, each shape we create
     using Processing needs a location that we specify with the coordinate sys-
     tem, where each point on the graph is represented by two numbers: (x,y).
     In traditional math graphs, the origin (where x=0 and y=0) is at the center
     of the graph, as shown in Figure 5-2.
                                     (100,100)




                     (0,0)




     Figure 5-2: A traditional coordinate
     system with the origin in the center

          In computer graphics, however, the coordinate system is a little different.
     Its origin is in the top-left corner of the screen so that x and y increase as you
     move right and down, respectively, as you can see in Figure 5-3.
      (0,0)




                                     (100,100)

     Figure 5-3: The coordinate system for computer
     graphics, with the origin in the top-left corner

                                     Transforming Shapes with Geometry   79
                Each coordinate on this plane represents a pixel on the screen. As
            you can see, this means you don’t have to deal with negative coordinates.
            We’ll use functions to transform and translate increasingly complex shapes
            around this coordinate system.
                Drawing a single circle was fairly easy, but drawing multiple shapes can
            get complicated pretty quickly. For example, imagine drawing a design like
            the one shown in Figure 5-4.




            Figure 5-4: A circle made of
            circles

                Specifying the size and location of each individual circle and spacing
            them out perfectly evenly would involve entering many lines of similar code.
            Fortunately, you don’t really need to know the absolute x- and y-coordinates
            of each circle to do this. With Processing, you can easily place objects wher-
            ever you want on the grid.
                Let’s see how you can do this using a simple example to start.


   Transformation Functions
            You might remember doing transformations with pencil and paper in geom-
            etry class, which you performed on a collection of points to laboriously move
            a shape around. It’s much more fun when you let a computer do the trans-
            forming. In fact, there wouldn’t be any computer graphics worth looking at
            without transformations! Geometric transformations like translation and
            rotation let you change where and how your objects appear without altering
            the objects themselves. For example, you can use transformations to move a
            triangle to a different location or spin it around without changing its shape.
            Processing has a number of built-in transformation functions that make it
            easy to translate and rotate objects.

            Translating Objects with translate()
            To translate means to move a shape on a grid so that all points of the shape
            move in the same direction and the same distance. In other words, transla-
            tions let you move a shape on a grid without changing the shape itself and
            without tilting it in the slightest.


80   Chapter 5
                    Translating an object in math class involves manually changing the
                coordinates of all the points in the object. But in Processing, you translate
                an object by moving the grid itself, while the object’s coordinates stay the
                same! For an example of this, let’s put a rectangle on the screen. Revise
                your existing code in geometry.pyde with the code in Listing 5-2.

geometry.pyde   def setup():
                    size(600,600)

                def draw():
                    rect(20,40,50,30)

                Listing 5-2: Drawing a rectangle to translate

                     Here, we use the rect() function to draw the rectangle. The first two
                parameters are the x- and y-coordinates telling Processing where the top-
                left corner of the rectangle should be. The third and fourth parameters
                indicate its width and its height, respectively.
                     Run this code, and you should see the rectangle shown in Figure 5-5.
                 (0,0)




                                                  (300,300)




                Figure 5-5: The default coordinate setup with the origin at the top left

       Note     In these examples, I’m showing the grid for reference, but you won’t see it on your screen.

                     Now let’s tell Processing to translate the rectangle using the code in
                Listing 5-3. Notice that we don’t change the coordinates of the rectangle.

geometry.pyde   def setup():
                    size(600,600)

                def draw():
                    translate(50,80);
                    rect(50,100,100,60)

                Listing 5-3: Translating the rectangle

                                                  Transforming Shapes with Geometry   81
                     Here, we use translate() to move the rectangle. We provide two param-
                eters: the first tells Processing how far to move the grid in the horizontal (x)
                direction, and the second parameter is for how far to move the grid vertically,
                in the y-direction. So translate(50,80) should move the entire grid 50 pixels to
                the right and 80 pixels down, as shown in Figure 5-6.


                     (0,0)




                                                     (300,300)




                Figure 5-6: Translating a rectangle by moving the grid 50 pixels
                to the right and 80 pixels down

                    Very often it’s useful (and easier!) to have the origin (0,0) in the cen-
                ter of the canvas. You can use translate() to easily move the origin to the
                center of your grid. You can also use it to change the width and height
                of your canvas if you want it bigger or smaller. Let’s explore Processing’s
                built-in width and height variables, which let you update the size of your
                canvas without having to change the numbers manually. To see this in
                action, update the existing code in Listing 5-3 so it looks like Listing 5-4.

geometry.pyde   def setup():
                    size(600,600)

                def draw():
                    translate(width/2, height/2)
                    rect(50,100,100,60)

                Listing 5-4: Using the width and height variables to translate the rectangle

                    Whatever numbers you put in the size declaration in the setup() func-
                tion will become the “width” and “height” of the canvas. In this case,
                because I used size(600,600), they’re both 600 pixels. When we change
                the translate() line to translate(width/2, height/2) using variables instead

82   Chapter 5
of specific numbers, we tell Processing to move the location (0,0) to the
center of the display window, no matter what the size is. This means that
if you change the size of the window, Processing will automatically update
width and height, and you won’t have to go through all your code and
change the numbers manually.
     Run the updated code, and you should see something like Figure 5-7.




                                 (0,0)




                                                                  (300,300)

Figure 5-7: The grid is translated to the center of the screen.

    Notice that the origin is still labeled as (0,0), which shows that we
haven’t actually moved the origin point but rather the entire coordinate
plane itself so that the origin point falls in the middle of our canvas.

Rotating Objects with rotate()
 In geometry, rotation is a kind of transformation that turns an object around a
 center point, as if it’s turning on an axis. The rotate() function in Processing
 rotates the grid around the origin (0,0). It takes a single number as its argu-
 ment to specify the angle at which you want to rotate the grid around the
 point (0,0). The units for the rotation angle are radians, which you learn
 about in precalculus class. Instead of using 360 degrees to do a full rotation,
 we can use 2π (around 6.28) radians. If you think in degrees, like I do, you
 can use the radians() function to easily convert your degrees to radians so you
don’t have to do the math yourself.
     To see how the rotate() function works, enter the code shown in
­Figure 5-8 into your existing sketch by replacing the translate() code
 inside the draw() function with each of these examples, and then run
 them. Figure 5-8 shows the results.


                                 Transforming Shapes with Geometry   83
  rotate(radians(20));                                   translate(200,200);
  (0,0                                                   rotate(radians(20));
      )




                                                                      (0,0
                                                                          )




                (30
                   0,3
                         00)




                                                                                  (30
                                                                                     0,3
                                                                                        00)



Figure 5-8: The grid always rotates around (0,0)

                          On the left side of Figure 5-8, the grid is rotated 20 degrees around
                      (0,0), which is at the top-left corner of the screen. In the example on the
                      right, the origin is first translated 200 units to the right and 200 units down
                      and then the grid is rotated.
                          The rotate() function makes it easy to draw a circle of objects like the
                      one in Figure 5-4 using the following steps:

                      1.       Translate to where you want the center of the circle to be.
                      2.       Rotate the grid and put the objects along the circumference of the circle.

                           Now that you know how to use transformation functions to manipu-
                      late the location of different objects on your canvas, let’s actually re-create
                      ­Figure 5-4 in Processing.

                      Drawing a Circle of Circles
                      To create the circles arranged in a circle in Figure 5-4, we’ll use a for i
                      in range() loop to repeat the circles and make sure the circles are evenly
                      spaced. First, let’s think about how many degrees should be between the
                      circles to make a full circle, remembering that a circle is 360 degrees.
                           Enter the code shown in Listing 5-5 to create this design.

geometry.pyde         def setup():
                          size(600,600)

                      def draw():
                          translate(width/2,height/2)
                          for i in range(12):




84   Chapter 5
                         ellipse(200,0,50,50)
                         rotate(radians(360/12))

                Listing 5-5: Drawing a circular design

                    Note that the translate(width/2,height/2) function inside the draw()
                function translates the grid to the center of the screen. Then, we start a for
                loop to create an ellipse at a point on the grid, starting at (200,0), as you
                can see from the first two parameters of the function. Then we set the size
                of each small circle by setting both the width and height of the ellipse to 50.
                Finally, we rotate the grid by 360/12, or 30 degrees, before creating the
                next ellipse. Note that we use radians() to convert 30 degrees into radians
                inside the rotate() function. This means that each circle will be 30 degrees
                away from the next one.
                    When you run this, you should see what’s shown in Figure 5-9.




                Figure 5-9: Using transformation to create a circular design

                    We have successfully arranged a bunch of circles into a circular shape!

                Drawing a Circle of Squares
                Modify the program you wrote in Listing 5-5 and change the circles into
                squares. To do this, just change ellipse in the existing code to rect to make
                the circles into squares, as shown here:

geometry.pyde   def setup():
                    size(600,600)

                def draw():
                    translate(width/2,height/2)
                    for i in range(12):
                        rect(200,0,50,50)
                        rotate(radians(360/12))


                                                Transforming Shapes with Geometry   85
                    That was easy!


    Animating Objects
                Processing is great for animating your objects to create dynamic graphics.
                For your first animation, you’ll use the rotate() function. Normally, rotate
                happens instantly, so you don’t get to see the action take place—only the
                result of the rotation. But this time, we’ll use a time variable t, which allows
                us to see the rotation unfold in real time!

                Creating the t Variable
                Let’s use our circle of squares to write an animated program. To start, create
                the t variable and initialize it to 0 by adding t = 0 before the setup() function.
                Then insert the code in Listing 5-6 before the for loop.

geometry.pyde   t = 0

                def setup():
                    size(600,600)

                def draw():
                    translate(width/2,height/2)
                    rotate(radians(t))
                    for i in range(12):
                        rect(200,0,50,50)
                        rotate(radians(360/12))

                Listing 5-6: Adding the t variable

                    However, if you try to run this code, you’ll get the following error message:

                UnboundLocalError: local variable 't' referenced before assignment

                    This is because Python doesn’t know whether we’re creating a new local
                variable named t inside the function that doesn’t have anything to do with
                the global variable t outside the function, or just calling the global variable.
                Because we want to use the global variable, add global t at the beginning of
                the draw() function so the program knows which one we’re referring to.
                    Enter the complete code shown here:

geometry.pyde   t = 0

                def setup():
                    size(600,600)

                def draw():
                    global t
                    #set background white
                    background(255)



86   Chapter 5
                    translate(width/2,height/2)
                    rotate(radians(t))
                    for i in range(12):
                        rect(200,0,50,50)
                        rotate(radians(360/12))
                    t += 1

                    This code starts t at 0, rotates the grid that number of degrees, incre-
                ments t by 1, and then repeats. Run it, and you should see the squares start
                to rotate in a circular pattern, as in Figure 5-10.




                Figure 5-10: Making squares rotate in a circle

                    Pretty cool! Now let’s try rotating each individual square.

                Rotating the Individual Squares
                Because rotating is done around (0,0) in Processing, inside the loop we first
                have to translate to where each square needs to be, then rotate, and finally
                draw the square. Change the loop in your code to look like Listing 5-7.

geometry.pyde       for i in range(12):
                        translate(200,0)
                        rotate(radians(t))
                        rect(0,0,50,50)
                        rotate(radians(360/12))

                Listing 5-7: Rotating each square

                    This translates the grid to where we want to place the square, rotates
                the grid so the square rotates, and then draws the square using the rect()
                function.



                                                Transforming Shapes with Geometry   87
                Saving Orientation with pushMatrix()
                and popMatrix()
                When you run Listing 5-7, you should see that it creates some strange
                behavior. The squares don’t rotate around the center, but keep moving
                around the screen instead, as shown in Figure 5-11.




                Figure 5-11: The squares are flying all over!

                    This is due to changing the center and changing the orientation of the
                grid so much. After translating to the location of the square, we need to
                rotate back to the center of the circle before translating to the next square.
                We could use another translate() function to undo the first one, but we
                might have to undo more transformations, and that could get confusing.
                Fortunately, there’s an easier way.
                    Processing has two built-in functions that save the orientation of the
                grid at a certain point and then return to that orientation: pushMatrix() and
                popMatrix(). In this case, we want to save the orientation when we’re in the
                center of the screen. To do this, revise the loop to look like Listing 5-8.

geometry.pyde   for i in range(12):
                    pushMatrix() #save this orientation
                    translate(200,0)
                    rotate(radians(t))
                    rect(0,0,50,50)
                    popMatrix() #return to the saved orientation
                    rotate(radians(360/12))

                Listing 5-8: Using pushMatrix() and popMatrix()

                    The pushMatrix() function saves the position of the coordinate system at
                the center of the circle of squares. Then we translate to the location of the


88   Chapter 5
     square, rotate the grid so the square will spin, and then draw the square.
     Then we use popMatrix() to return instantly to the center of the circle of
     squares and repeat for all 12 squares.

     Rotating Around the Center
     The preceding code should work perfectly, but the rotation may look strange;
     that’s because Processing by default locates a rectangle at its t­ op-left corner
     and rotates it about its top-left corner. This makes the squares look like they’re
     veering off the path of the larger circle. If you want your squares to rotate
     around their centers, add this line to your setup() function:

         rectMode(CENTER)

          Note that the all-uppercase CENTER in rectMode() matters. (You can also
     experiment with other types of rectMode(), like CORNER, CORNERS, and RADIUS.)
     Adding rectMode(CENTER) should make each square rotate around its center.
     If you want the squares to spin more quickly, change the rotate() line to
     increase the time in t, like so:

         rotate(radians(5*t))

         Here, 5 is the frequency of the rotation. This means the program
     multiplies the value of t by 5 and rotates by the product. Therefore,
     the square will rotate five times as far as before. Change it to see what
     happens! Comment out the rotate() line outside the loop (by adding a
     hashtag at the beginning) to make the squares rotate in place, as shown
     in Listing 5-9.

         translate(width/2,height/2)
         #rotate(radians(t))
         for i in range(12):
             rect(200,0,50,50)

     Listing 5-9: Commenting out a line instead of deleting it

         Being able to use transformations like translate() and rotate() to create
     dynamic graphics is a very powerful technique, but it can produce unex-
     pected results if you do things in the wrong order!


Creating an Interactive Rainbow Grid
     Now that you’ve learned how to create designs using loops and to rotate
     them in different ways, we’ll create something pretty awesome: a grid of
     squares whose rainbow colors follow your mouse cursor! The first step is to
     make a grid.




                                     Transforming Shapes with Geometry   89
                 Drawing a Grid of Objects
                 Many tasks involved in math and in creating games like Minesweeper require
                 a grid. Grids are necessary for some of the models and all the cellular auto­
                 mata we’ll create in later chapters, so it’s worth learning how to write code
                 for making a grid that we can reuse. To begin with, we’ll make a 12 × 12 grid
                 of squares, evenly sized and spaced. Making a grid this size may seem like a
                 time-consuming task, but in fact it’s easy to do using a loop.
                      Open a new Processing sketch and save as colorGrid.pyde. Too bad we
                 used the name “grid” previously. We’ll make a 20 × 20 grid of squares on a
                 white background. The squares need to be rect, and we need to use a for
                 loop within a for loop to make sure they are all the same size and spaced
                 equally. Also, we need our 25 × 25 pixel squares to be drawn every 30 pixels,
                 using this line:

                 rect(30*x,30*y,25,25)

                      As the x and y variables go up by 1, squares are drawn at 50-pixel inter-
                 vals in two dimensions. We’ll start off, as usual, by writing our setup() and
                 draw() functions, as in the previous sketch (see Listing 5-10).

colorGrid.pyde   def setup():
                     size(600,600)

                 def draw():
                     #set background white
                     background(255)

                 Listing 5-10: The standard structure for a Processing sketch: setup() and draw()

                      This sets the size of the window at 600 by 600 pixels, and sets the back-
                 ground color to white. Next we’ll create a nested loop, where two variables
                 will both go from 0 to 19, for a total of 20 numbers, since we want 20 rows
                 of 20 squares. Listing 5-11 shows the code that creates the grid.

                 def setup():
                     size(600,600)

                 def draw():
                     #set background white
                     background(255)
                     for x in range(20):
                         for y in range(20):
                             rect(30*x,30*y,25,25)

                 Listing 5-11: The code for a grid

                    This should create a 20 × 20 grid of squares, as you can see in Figure 5-12.
                 Time to add some colors to our grid.




90   Chapter 5
Figure 5-12: A 20 × 20 grid!



Adding the Rainbow Color to Objects
Processing’s colorMode() function helps us add some cool color to our
sketches! It’s used to switch between the RGB and HSB modes. Recall that
RGB uses three numbers indicating amounts of red, green, and blue. In
HSB, the three numbers represent levels of hue, saturation, and bright-
ness. The only one we need to change here is the first number, which
represents the hue. The other two numbers can be the maximum value,
255. Figure 5-13 shows how to make rainbow colors by changing only the
first value, the hue. Here, the 10 squares have the hue values shown in the
figure, with 255 for saturation and 255 for brightness.



 0     20    40    60     80   100   120   140   160   180

Figure 5-13: The colors of the rainbow using HSB mode and
changing the hue value

     Since we’re locating the rectangles at (30*x,30*y) in Listing 5-11, we’ll cre-
ate a variable that measures the distance of the mouse from that location:

          d = dist(30*x,30*y,mouseX,mouseY)

     Processing has a dist() function that finds the distance between two
points, and in this case it’s the distance between the square and the mouse.
It saves the distance to a variable called d, and we’ll link the hue to that vari-
able. Listing 5-12 shows the changes to the code.

                               Transforming Shapes with Geometry   91
colorGrid.pyde   def setup():
                     size(600,600)
                     rectMode(CENTER)
                  u colorMode(HSB)

                 def draw():
                     #set background black
                   background(0)
                     translate(20,20)
                     for x in range(30):
                         for y in range(30):
                           d = dist(30*x,30*y,mouseX,mouseY)
                             fill(0.5*d,255,255)
                             rect(30*x,30*y,25,25)

                 Listing 5-12: Using the dist() function

                      We insert the colorMode() function and pass HSB to it u. In the draw() func-
                 tion, we set the background to black first . Then we calculate the distance
                 from the mouse to the square, which is at (30*x,30*y) . In the next line, we
                 set the fill color using HSB numbers. The hue value is half the distance, while
                 the saturation and brightness numbers are both 255, the maximum.
                      The hue is the only thing we change: we update the hue according to
                 the distance the rectangle is from the mouse. We do this with the dist()
                 function, which takes four arguments: the x- and y-coordinates of two
                 points. It returns the distance between the points.
                      Run this code and you should see a very colorful design that changes
                 colors according to the mouse’s location, as shown in Figure 5-14.
                      Now that you’ve learned how to add colors to your objects, let’s explore
                 how we can create more complicated shapes.




                 Figure 5-14: Adding colors to your grid

92   Chapter 5
    Drawing Complex Patterns Using
    Triangles
                 In this section, we create more
                 complicated, Spirograph-style pat-
                 terns using triangles. For example,
                 take a look at the sketch made up
                 of rotating triangles in Figure 5-15,
                 created by the University of Oslo’s
                 Roger Antonsen.
                      The original design moves,
                 but in this book you’ll have to
                 imagine all the triangles rotat-
                 ing. This sketch blew me away!
                 Although this design looks very
                 complicated, it’s not that difficult
                 to make. Remember Nasrudin’s
                 joke about the brick from the
                 beginning of the chapter? Like
                 Nasrudin’s house, this compli-
                 cated design is just a collection of     Figure 5-15: Sketch of 90 rotating equilateral
                 identical shapes. But what shape?        triangles by Roger Antonsen. See it in motion
                 Antonsen gave us a helpful clue          at https://rantonse.no/en/art/2016-11-30.
                 to creating this design when he
                 named the sketch “90 Rotating Equilateral Triangles.” It tells us that all we
                 have to do is figure out how to draw an equilateral triangle, rotate it, and
                 then repeat that for a total of 90 triangles. Let’s first discuss how to draw
                 an equilateral triangle using the ­triangle() function. To start, open a new
                 Processing sketch and name it triangles.pyde. The code in Listing 5-13 shows
                 one way to c­ reate a rotating triangle but not an equilateral one.

triangles.pyde   def setup():
                     size(600,600)
                     rectMode(CENTER)

                 t = 0

                 def draw():
                     global t
                     translate(width/2,height/2)
                     rotate(radians(t))
                     triangle(0,0,100,100,200,-200)
                     t += 0.5

                 Listing 5-13: Drawing a rotating triangle, but not the right kind

                      Listing 5-13 uses the lessons you learned previously: it creates a t vari-
                 able (for time), translates to where we want the triangle to be, rotates the
                 grid, and then draws the triangle. Finally, it increments t. When you run
                 this code, you should see something like Figure 5-16.

                                                  Transforming Shapes with Geometry   93
             Figure 5-16: Rotating a triangle around one of its vertices

                  As you can see in Figure 5-16, the triangle rotates around one of its
             vertices, or points, and thus creates a circle with the outer point. You’ll also
             notice that this is a right triangle (a triangle containing a 90-degree angle),
             not an equilateral one.
                  To re-create Antonsen’s sketch, we need to draw an equilateral triangle,
             which is a triangle with equal sides. We also need to find the center of the
             equilateral triangle to be able to rotate it about its center. To do this, we
             need to find the location of the three vertices of the triangle. Let’s discuss
             how to draw an equilateral triangle by locating it at its center and specifying
             the location of its vertices.

             A 30-60-90 Triangle
             To find the location of the three vertices
             of our equilateral triangle, we’ll review
             a particular type of triangle you’ve likely
             seen in geometry class: the 30-60-90 tri-
             angle, which is a special right triangle. First,
             we need an equilateral triangle, as shown
                                                                         120° 120°
             in Figure 5-17.
                  This equilateral triangle is made up                       120°
             of three equal parts. The point in the
             middle is the center of the triangle, with
             the three dissecting lines meeting at 120        Figure 5-17: An equilateral triangle
             degree angles. To draw a triangle in Pro-        divided into three equal parts
             cessing, we give the triangle() function
             six numbers: the x- and y-coordinates of all three vertices. To find the coor-
             dinates of the vertices of the equilateral triangle shown in Figure 5-17, let’s
             cut the bottom triangle in half, as shown in Figure 5-18.

94   Chapter 5
               120°      120°

                        60°

                        90°         30°

   Figure 5-18: Dividing up the equilat-
   eral triangle into special triangles

     Dividing the bottom triangle in half creates two right triangles, which are
classic 30-60-90 triangles. As you might recall, the ratio between the sides of a
30-60-90 triangle can be expressed as shown in Figure 5-19.


             2x          60°
                                x

      30°
                −
             x √3

Figure 5-19: The ratios of the
sides in a 30-60-90 triangle,
from the legend on an SAT test

     If we call the length of the smaller leg x, the hypotenuse is twice that
length, or 2x, and the longer leg is x times the square root of 3, or approx-
imately 1.732x. We’re going to be creating our function using the length
from the center of the big equilateral triangle in Figure 5-18 to one of
its vertices, which happens to be the hypotenuse of the 30-60-90 triangle.
That means we can measure everything in terms of that length. For exam-
ple, if we call the hypotenuse length, then the smaller leg will be half that
length, or length/2. Finally, the longer leg will be length divided by 2 times
the square root of 3. Figure 5-20 zooms in on the 30-60-90 triangle.


             60°       length
  length/2
             90°             30°
                           −
                   length*√3 /2

Figure 5-20: The 30-60-90 triangle
up close and personal

    As you can see, a 30-60-90 triangle has internal angles of 30, 60, and
90 degrees, and the lengths of the sides are in known proportions. You may

                                      Transforming Shapes with Geometry   95
                   be familiar with this from the Pythagorean Theorem, which will come up
                   again shortly.
                        We’ll call the distance from the center of the larger equilateral triangle
                   to its vertex the “length,” which is also the hypotenuse of the 30-60-90 t­ riangle.
                   You’ll need to know the ratios between the lengths of the sides of this special
                   triangle in order to find the three vertices of the equilateral triangle with
                   respect to the center—you can draw it (the big equilateral triangle we’re try-
                   ing to draw) by specifying where each point of the triangle should be.
                        The shorter leg of the right triangle opposite the 30 degree angle is
                   always half the hypotenuse, and the longer leg is the measure of the shorter
                   leg times the square root of 3. So if we use the center point for drawing the
                   big equilateral triangle, the coordinates of the three vertices would be as
                   shown in Figure 5-21.
                                            (0, −length)




                                               (0,0)




                             −                                      −
                   (−length*√3 /2, length/2)               (length*√3/2, length/2)

                   Figure 5-21: The vertices of the equilateral triangle

                        As you can see, because this triangle is made up of 30-60-90 triangles
                   on all sides, we can use the special relation between them to figure out how
                   far each vertex of the equilateral triangle should be from the origin.

                   Drawing an Equilateral Triangle
                   Now we can use the vertices we derived from the 30-60-90 triangle to create
                   an equilateral triangle, using the code in Listing 5-14.

triangles.pyde     def setup():
                       size(600,600)
                       rectMode(CENTER)

                   t = 0

                   def draw():
                       global t
                       translate(width/2,height/2)
                       rotate(radians(t))
                       tri(200) #draw the equilateral triangle
                       t += 0.5

                 u def tri(length):

96   Chapter 5
   '''Draws an equilateral triangle
   around center of triangle'''
  triangle(0,-length,
            -length*sqrt(3)/2, length/2,
            length*sqrt(3)/2, length/2)

Listing 5-14: The complete code for making a rotating equilateral triangle

     First, we write the tri() function to take the variable length , which
is the hypotenuse of the special 30-60-90 triangles we cut the equilateral
triangle into. We then make a triangle using the three vertices we found.
Inside the call to the triangle() function , we specify the location of
each of the three vertices of the triangle: (0,-length), (-length*sqrt(3)/2,
length/2), and (length*sqrt(3)/2, length/2).
     When you run the code, you should see something like Figure 5-22.




Figure 5-22: A rotating equilateral triangle!

     Now we can cover up all the triangles created during rotation by adding
this line to the beginning of the draw() function:

    background(255) #white

     This should erase all the rotating triangles except for one, so we just
have a single equilateral triangle on the screen. All we have to do is put 90
of them in a circle, just like we did earlier in this chapter, using the rotate()
function.


                          Exercise 5-1: Spin Cycle

     Create a circle of equilateral triangles in a Processing sketch and rotate them
     using the rotate() function.




                                 Transforming Shapes with Geometry   97
                 Drawing Multiple Rotating Triangles
                 Now that you’ve learned how to rotate a single equilateral triangle, we need
                 to figure out how to arrange multiple equilateral triangles into a circle. This
                 is similar to what you created while rotating squares, but this time we’ll use
                 our tri() function. Enter the code in Listing 5-15 in place of the def draw()
                 section in Processing and then run it.

triangles.pyde   def setup():
                     size(600,600)
                     rectMode(CENTER)

                 t = 0

                 def draw():
                     global t
                     background(255)#white
                     translate(width/2,height/2)
                   for i in range(90):
                         #space the triangles evenly
                         #around the circle
                         rotate(radians(360/90))
                       pushMatrix() #save this orientation
                         #go to circumference of circle
                         translate(200,0)
                         #spin each triangle
                         rotate(radians(t))
                         #draw the triangle
                         tri(100)
                         #return to saved orientation
                       popMatrix()
                     t += 0.5

                 def tri(length):

                   noFill() #makes the triangle transparent

                     triangle(0,-length,
                              -length*sqrt(3)/2, length/2,
                              length*sqrt(3)/2, length/2)

                 Listing 5-15: Creating 90 rotating triangles

                     At , we use the for loop to arrange 90 triangles around the circle,
                 making sure they’re evenly spaced by dividing 360 by 90. Then at  we
                 use pushMatrix() to save this position before moving the grid around. At
                 the end of the loop at  we use popMatrix() to return to the saved position.
                 In the tri() function at , we add the noFill() line to make the triangles
                 transparent.




98   Chapter 5
     Now we have 90 rotating transparent triangles, but they’re all rotating
in exactly the same way. It’s kind of cool, but not as cool as Antonsen’s sketch
yet. Next, you’ll learn how to make each triangle rotate a little differently
from the adjacent ones to make the pattern more interesting.

Phase-Shifting the Rotation
We can change the pattern in which the triangles rotate with a phase
shift, which makes each triangle lag a little bit behind its neighbor, giving
the sketch a “wave” or “cascade” effect. Each triangle has been assigned
a number in the loop, represented by i. We need to add i to t in the
rotate(radians(t)) function, like this:

         rotate(radians(t+i))

     When you run this, you should see something like F
                                                      ­ igure 5-23.




Figure 5-23: Rotating triangles with phase shift

    Notice there’s a break in the pattern on the right side of the screen. This
break in the pattern is caused by the phase shifts not matching up from the
beginning triangle to the last triangle. We want a nice, seamless pattern, so
we have to make the phase shifts add up to a multiple of 360 degrees to com-
plete the circle. Because there are 90 triangles in the design, we’ll divide 360
by 90 and multiply that by i:

         rotate(radians(t+i*360/90))




                                Transforming Shapes with Geometry   99
                 It’s easy enough to calculate 360/90, which is 4, and then use that
             number to plug into the code, but I’m leaving the expression in because
             we’ll need it in case we want to change the number of triangles later. For
             now, this should create a nice seamless pattern, as shown in Figure 5-24.




             Figure 5-24: Seamlessly rotating triangles with phase shift

                By making our phase shifts add up to a multiple of 360, we were able to
             remove the break in the pattern.

             Finalizing the Design
             To make the design look more like the one in Figure 5-15, we need to
             change the phase shift a little. Play around with it yourself to see how you
             can change the look of the sketch!
                  Here, we’re going to change the phase shift by multiplying i by 2, which
             will increase the shift between each triangle and its neighbor. Change the
             rotate() line in your code to the following:

                      rotate(radians(t+2*i*360/90))

                 After making this change, run the code. As you can see in Figure 5-25,
             our design now looks very close to the design we were trying to re-create.




100   Chapter 5
Figure 5-25: Re-creation of Antonsen’s “90 Rotating
Equilateral Triangles” from Figure 5-15

     Now that you’ve learned how to re-create a complicated design like this,
try the next exercise to test your transformation skills!


                 Exercise 5-2: Rainbow Triangles

     Color each triangle of the rotating triangle sketch using stroke(). It should look
     like this.




                                Transforming Shapes with Geometry   101
   Summary
             In this chapter, you learned how to draw shapes like circles, squares, and
             triangles and arrange them into different patterns using Processing’s
             built-in transformation functions. You also learned how to make your
             shapes dynamic by animating your graphics and adding color. Just like
             how Nasrudin’s house was just a collection of bricks, the complicated
             code examples in this chapter are just a collection of simpler shapes or
             functions.
                 In the next chapter, you’ll build on what you learned in this chapter and
             expand your skills to using trigonometric functions like sine and cosine.
             You’ll draw even cooler designs and write new functions to create even more
             complicated behaviors, like leaving a trail and creating any shape from a
             bunch of vertices.




102   Chapter 5
