                      3
       SPELL OF REBIRTH:
  TRANSMUTING GREETINGS INTO
          SHELLCODE



           In this chapter, we’ll extend our ASM and
           C knowledge by writing a simple “Hello,
          world!” program. Then we’ll modify that
      code to create our first hacking-related program:
a simple shellcode for gaining command line access to
a computer system. Yes, we’re already that advanced.
Along the way, you’ll learn to work with pointers, use
the GNU Debugger to inspect a program’s allocated
memory, and explore different addressing modes for
memory access. First, though, we’ll cover a few more
general concepts about how computers handle infor-
mation internally, and we’ll take a closer look at how
memory works.
     Representing Information
                 We’re going to start working with values larger than 1 byte in this chapter,
                 and for you to fully comprehend what’s happening, I’ll need to introduce
                 some basic concepts about how information is represented and stored in
                 memory. This may not sound as exciting as writing a shellcode, but these
                 fundamentals are just as important. Bear with me, and in no time we’ll do
                 our very first hacking thing.


                 Bits, Bytes, Words, and Beyond
                 A bit is the smallest unit of information a computer can manage. A bit can
                 hold one of two values: 0 or 1. These values are sometimes referred to as
                 false and true, especially in the context of logic circuitry.
                      If you put 8 bits together, you get a byte. Therefore, a byte is a sequence
                 of eight 0s and/or 1s. One byte can represent any number up to 8 binary
                 digits long. If you’re more comfortable counting in decimal, a byte can store
                 256 different values, typically from 0 to 255. (I’ll talk more about numeric
                 representation shortly.)
                      Each half of a byte is known as a nibble. A byte has two nibbles, the high
                 one and the low one, each of which is 4 bits long. Therefore, each nibble
                 can represent 16 different values (24 = 16). When working in hexadecimal
                 (that is, base 16), we can represent 16 values just with one digit (0 to 9 for
                 0 through 9, and a to f for 10 through 15). This means a byte can be repre-
                 sented with two hexadecimal digits, one for each nibble.
                      Going up from bytes, we start doubling the number of bits:
                    •    A word is composed of 2 bytes, or 16 bits.
                    •    A doubleword or dword is composed of 2 words, which is 4 bytes, or
                         32 bits.
                    •    A quadword or qword is composed of 2 doublewords, which is 4 words,
                         8 bytes, or 64 bits.
                 We won’t go further than this, but feel free to figure out the names of the
                 next sizes in the list on your own.
                      Note that these are the typical interpretations of these terms, which
                 mostly derive from the Intel processor definitions. In reality, the definition
                 of a word can vary by architecture, based on the processor’s native word size,
                 as we’ll see in the next section.


                 Processor Native Word Sizes
                 A processor’s native word size is the number of bits the processor is most
                 comfortable working with at one time. In a sense, you encounter native
                 word sizes regularly: Whenever we talk about 32-bit versus 64-bit processors
                 or programs, we’re referencing word sizes. Those numbers are important
                 for more than just choosing the right download link for your Linux distribu-
                 tion, however. They also have some low-level implications:

74   Chapter 3
   •    Do you remember the registers in a processor? Sure you do. The pro-
        cessor’s native word size defines the size of those registers. A 32-bit
        processor has 32-bit registers, and a 64-bit processor has 64-bit reg-
        isters. (Actually, that isn’t completely accurate, but for now you can
        just consider this size to be the size of the processor’s registers.)
   •    The native word size is usually the width of the CPU’s data bus.
   •    The native word size is usually the width of the address bus as well.
We’ll talk about what those buses are later in the chapter.
     Overall, and without going deep into the electronics within the proces-
sor, what you need to know is that each processor is optimized to work with
its native word size. For example, a 32-bit processor will perform arithmetic
operations and access memory faster when it’s working with 32-bit values
than when it’s working with 16-bit values. I know that sounds a bit counter-
intuitive and may require an act of faith to believe, but it would be very te-
dious to go through all the complex details to understand why this is the
case. Just to give you a little taste, here’s a fragment from the “Data Types”
section of the Intel 80386 Programmer’s Reference Manual from 1986:
        When used in a configuration with a 32-bit bus, actual transfers of
        data between processor and memory take place in units of double-
        words beginning at addresses evenly divisible by four; however,
        the processor converts requests for misaligned words or double-
        words into the appropriate sequences of requests acceptable to the
        memory interface. Such misaligned data transfers reduce perfor-
        mance by requiring extra memory cycles. For maximum perfor-
        mance, data structures (including stacks) should be designed in
        such a way that, whenever possible, word operands are aligned at
        even addresses and doubleword operands are aligned at addresses
        evenly divisible by four. Due to instruction prefetching and queu-
        ing within the CPU, there is no requirement for instructions to be
        aligned on word or doubleword boundaries. (However, a slight
        increase in speed results if the target addresses of control transfers
        are evenly divisible by four.)

   Summing up, try to program your processor using its native word size. It
may look like you’re wasting some space, but that’s the right way to do it.


Decimal, Binary, Hexadecimal, and More
A number is an abstract entity that represents a quantity. The quantity is uni-
versal, but it can be represented in different ways. The most obvious exam-
ple is human language: A 1 means one thing, but English speakers say one,
Dutch speakers say een, Spanish speakers say uno, and so on. Each language
has a different verbal representation for the same abstract quantity.
     The same is true when we write numbers symbolically: The same ab-
stract quantity can be represented in many different ways. For instance, you
can write the number twenty-four with Western Arabic numerals as 24 or
with Roman numerals as XXIV. Setting aside the symbols themselves, the

                                             Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   75
                 more general way of representing numbers is using radix-based positional
                 numeral systems, where the position of each digit is associated with a value.
                      We normally use radix 10, which means that we use 10 possible symbols
                 (0 to 9) for each digit or position in a number. If we need to represent more
                 than 10 values, we add a new digit, which will be in the second position and
                 will be multiplied by 10. Right? Figure 3-1 shows an example.


                 1234
                 ^^^^
                 |||+-------- First position times 1     -> 4 x 1    =    4
                 ||+----------Second position times 10   -> 3 x 10   =   30
                 |+-----------Third position times 100   -> 2 x 100 = 200
                 +------------Fourth position times 1000 -> 1 x 1000 = 1000
                                                           -----------------
                                                                       1234

                 Figure 3-1: Parsing a base-10 number

                     We all know this from school, but the terminology might be unfamiliar.
                 The basis of the system, 10 in this case, is called the radix (or base), and the
                 value of each digit is multiplied by a power of the radix: The first position is
                 multiplied by 100 = 1, the second position by 101 = 10, the third position by
                 102 = 100, and so on.
                     Here’s the interesting thing: We can use any number as the radix, and
                 furthermore, we can represent any integer number using any radix. Taking
                 into account that computers use digital circuits that can only hold two val-
                 ues, any radix that’s a multiple of 2 is interesting for us. Actually, there are
                 three numerical representation systems that are used frequently when work-
                 ing with computers because they make some things much easier:
                     Binary A binary representation uses base 2, and therefore each digit
                     can take the value 0 or 1. Each position is multiplied by a power of 2
                     (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, . . .). Binary numbers are usually represented with a lead-
                     ing 0b. For example, 0b101 in binary is 5 in decimal: (1 × 22 ) + (0 × 21 )
                     + (1 × 20 ) = 5.
                     Octal This representation uses powers of 8 and symbols from 0 to 7 for
                     each digit. Each octal digit is represented using 3 bits. The octal system
                     was very common in the past, but it’s rarely used nowadays. Unix filesys-
                     tem permissions are one of the few cases where you’ll still see it. Octal
                     numbers are usually prefixed with a 0. For example, 011 in octal is 9 in
                     decimal: (1 × 81 ) + (1 × 80 ) = 9.
                     Hexadecimal This representation uses radix 16, so each digit can have
                     16 values. We only have 10 symbols in our normal numeral systems (0 to
                     9), so for the 6 missing symbols we use letters: a means 10, b means 11,
                     and so on up to f for 15. Each hexadecimal digit requires 4 bits (a



76   Chapter 3
    nibble), which is why this system is commonly used in computing. A byte
    can be represented with two hex digits, a word with four, a dword with
    eight, and so on. Hex values are usually prefixed with 0x. For example,
    0x21 is 33 in hexadecimal: (2 × 161 ) + (1 × 160 ) = 32 + 1 = 33.

     Which representation should you use in your code? It doesn’t really
matter, since all of them represent the same values. Which one you choose
depends on what you want to achieve and whether a particular system will
make your life easier, but it won’t have any impact on the final machine code
a program will generate.
     Our focus here has been on whole numbers. Computers also have ways
to represent real numbers with fractional components (fixed point and float-
ing point), but we won’t worry about such numbers in this book because you
rarely need this type of data for hacking or systems programming. No kernel
system call expects a real number as a parameter, for example.
     We’ve also sort of been assuming that all numbers are positive, but how
does a computer represent negative numbers? It’s not hard, but it isn’t obvi-
ous either.


Negative Numbers
To get a taste for how negative numbers work, let’s think about a single byte
(eight 0s or 1s). We’ve seen that 8 bits can represent 256 values, from 0 to
255. That’s perfect for natural numbers, but things change if we need neg-
ative numbers, too. First, we need to store the sign of the number, which
will take up one of the bits. That leaves us with 7 bits, which allows us to
represent 128 values. Figure 3-2 shows one way to represent a few of those
numbers.

8 => 0 000 1000          -8 => 1 000 1000
7 => 0 000 0111          -7 => 1 000 0111
...                      ...
1 => 0 000 0001          -1 => 1 000 0001
0 => 0 000 0000           0 => 1 000 0000

Figure 3-2: A bad way to represent negative numbers

    There are a few problems with this approach. The first is that we have
two representations for the number zero. That isn’t convenient as it can
make computations ambiguous, and we’re also losing the opportunity to
represent an extra number. The second problem is that arithmetic becomes
complicated: Multiplication is kind of easy, but addition is kind of hellish.
    Fortunately for us, long ago, some smart people came up with a better
representation for negative numbers. It also uses the most significant bit to
indicate the sign, but the value of the number is encoded in a more practical
way. Figure 3-3 shows how it works.



                                             Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   77
                 8 => 0 000 1000          -8 => 1 111 1000
                 7 => 0 000 0111          -7 => 1 111 1001
                 ...                      ...
                 2 => 0 000 0010          -2 => 1 111 1110
                 1 => 0 000 0001          -1 => 1 111 1111
                 0 => 0 000 0000

                 Figure 3-3: A good way to represent negative numbers

                      After the sign bit, the rest of the number is constructed by counting up-
                 ward as usual for positive numbers and counting downward (backward) for
                 negative numbers. Now there’s a single representation for zero, and it’s ac-
                 tually zero (a 0 in each bit). This has a consequence: Zero is considered a
                 positive number because its most significant bit is 0 (that’s our sign bit). This
                 is why a signed char can take values from –128 to +127; zero is the first of the
                 positive values.
                      With this system, you can change a number’s sign (that is, find the posi-
                 tive equivalent of a negative number or vice versa) with two simple steps:
                     1.   Invert all the bits in the number (this is called the one’s complement).
                     2.   Add 1 to the result.
                     Together, this sequence of operations is called taking the two’s
                 complement. Let’s use the number 5 as an example and calculate its two’s
                 complement to determine the bit representation of –5:
                     1.   The number 5 in binary is 00000101, so inverting the bits gives us
                          11111010.
                     2.   Adding 1 gives us 11111011, which is indeed –5.

                      The biggest advantage of this system is that basic arithmetic operations
                 just work. If you add the binary representations of 5 and –5 that were just
                 shown, it results in 0. Subtraction and multiplication also work out of
                 the box.

                                                 SIGN EXTENSION

                     There’s a small caveat to consider when using negative numbers, known as sign
                     extension. Suppose we store the value –1 in a given memory position, and we
                     read that value into a 32-bit register. We’ll get the following:

                     Memory                Register
                     1111 1111   (-1)      0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 1111 1111


                     When considering the register as a whole 32-bit number, the value we have is
                     256, not –1. Representing the value –1 with 32 bits requires all the bits to be
                     1s (to see why, take the two’s complement, as just described). To deal with these




78   Chapter 3
    cases, processors typically offer a way to perform a sign extension operation. This
    operation takes the sign bit and copies it over to the upper bits of the value.
    As we saw in Chapter 2, most processors allow us to work with different sizes
    of register. Usually, you can select how many bits you want to extend the sign
    to, depending on whether you’re using words or doublewords in your program.
    For example, on x86_64, EAX is the lower 32 bits of the 64-bit RAX register. If
    we only need 32 bits for our operations, we can just extend the sign for the first
    32 bits; otherwise, we can extend it to the whole 64-bit value:

    ORIGINAL                0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 1111 1111
    16-bit sign extension   0000 0000 0000 0000 1111 1111 1111 1111
    32-bit sign extension   1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111
    64-bit sign extension   1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111
                            1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111 1111


    Remember, each 4 binary bits is a nibble, and two nibbles form a byte.
    The sign extension operation works the same way for positive numbers, where
    the sign bit is 0, as for negative numbers.


    We won’t discuss negative number representation further, but the in-
terested reader can see the “Two’s complement” Wikipedia page (https://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two’s_complement) for more information.


Text Strings
We’ve been talking about how to represent integer numbers, but there’s
one more type of data we’ll want to work with: text. A text string is just a se-
quence of characters—that is, any message we write on the screen or any text
we type on a keyboard to provide as input to our programs.
     We can only store numbers in computer memory, so how can we rep-
resent the letters in a text string? The answer is to use a code, which in its
simplest form is just a mapping between symbols. We can assign each letter
and symbol we want to be able to represent a number, then use the code to
convert those numbers into characters to display on the screen.
     There are a plethora of options for assigning numbers to characters. We
could come up with our own code, but several good systems already exist,
with American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) being
the best known. Back in the day, Extended Binary Coded Decimal Inter-
change Code (EBCDIC) was also popular because early IBM computers used
it, and more recently Unicode has become the de facto standard. UTF-8,
one of the encodings for Unicode, uses variable-length encoding and is back-
ward compatible with ASCII. In other words, 1-byte-long UTF-8 codes are
the same as the ASCII codes.
     We’ll use ASCII string encoding throughout this book. ASCII was orig-
inally defined as a 7-bit code, to be compatible with the teletype machines
used back in the 1960s. This is also why the first 32 codes (from 0x00 to 0x1f)
are control values intended to operate those machines. For example, the


                                                Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   79
                 code 0x0a, also known as LF or line feed, was intended to move the paper in
                 the teletype machine to the next line. Most of those codes aren’t used any-
                 more, but a few of them are: Today you’ll find line feed, carriage return, and
                 tabulation represented as \n, \r, and \t, respectively.
                     In ASCII, the value 0x20 represents a space. Numbers are encoded using
                 the values 0x30 to 0x39, which makes it convenient to print decimal digits in
                 ASM programs: Just add 0x30 to the value. Uppercase letters are encoded us-
                 ing the values 0x41 to 0x5a, and lowercase letters are stored using the values
                 0x61 to 0x7a. This means we can easily convert between uppercase and low-
                 ercase just by switching bit 5 of a character on or off. When sorting strings
                 alphabetically, the sort is actually based on these underlying numbers, so a
                 word beginning with a capital letter will be sorted before a word beginning
                 with a lowercase letter.
                     To use a text string in a program, we need one extra piece of informa-
                 tion: We need to tell the program when those numbers in memory are no
                 longer letters. Put another way, we need to define the length of the string.
                 There are two main options for this:
                     •    Store a number indicating the size of a string together with the se-
                          quence of numbers representing the string itself.
                     •    Use a number that would never appear in a text string as a guard
                          value or delimiter at the end of the string.
                     Languages like Java use option 1. (Historically, Java also used the UTF-16
                 encoding, an encoding for Unicode that has a minimum unit size of 2 bytes.)
                 The C language uses option 2, with 0x00 indicating the end of a string.
                 Figure 3-4 compares how these two languages would store the string "ABC"
                 in memory.


                 Java                        C
                 Size       | 0x00 |         | 0x41 | Char 1
                 Size       | 0x00 |         | 0x42 | Char 2
                 Size       | 0x00 |         | 0x43 | Char 3
                 Size       | 0x04 |         | 0x00 | End of string
                 Char 1     | 0x00 |
                 Char 1     | 0x41 |
                 Char 2     | 0x00 |
                 Char 2     | 0x42 |
                 Char 3     | 0x00 |
                 Char 3     | 0x43 |

                 Figure 3-4: String representation in Java versus C

                     Java starts with a 32-bit value to store the size of the string, meaning
                 even an empty string will take up at least 4 bytes in memory. Then it uses
                 16 bits to encode each character. Like UTF-8, UTF-16 matches the ASCII
                 code for each character, but extends its size to 2 bytes. By contrast, C uses
                 1 byte per character, plus an extra byte for the guard value at the end. Our

80   Chapter 3
       three-character string therefore takes up just 4 bytes, compared to the
       10 bytes required by Java.

NOTE   Java 9 introduced a new string representation called compact strings. Now, unless
       the string requires a special character that needs to be encoded using UTF-16, Java
       uses 1 byte per character. It also adds an extra byte to indicate which type of encod-
       ing is used (1 or 2 bytes per character). In this newer representation, the Java string
       in our example would take up 8 bytes—still bigger than the C version, but not by
       as much.
            Why would Java code strings this way when it eats up so much more
       space? The answer is security. The Java approach is to check the sizes of all
       strings and make sure that we never write outside of the allotted bounds.
       The C implementation is lighter and more compact, but it leads to all kinds
       of security problems when not used properly. We’ll see this in Chapter 4
       when we discuss buffer overflow exploits.


A Closer Look at Memory
       Let’s use what you have just learned about how computers represent
       information—in particular, the processor’s native word size—to take a closer
       look at how memory works. I mentioned earlier that a 32-bit processor will
       operate faster on a 32-bit value than a 16-bit value, and accessing it in mem-
       ory will be faster too. An implication of this is that, even though the smallest
       addressable value in memory is 8 bits (remember the size of our memory
       drawers from Chapter 1?), a 32-bit processor can read 32 bits (4 bytes) from
       memory at once.
           That simple sentence has some important concepts behind it. Let’s go
       deeper.


       A Simplified Hardware Memory Model
       The memory system in a PC can be quite complicated, and it’s beyond the
       scope of this book to go into all the details. However, discussing a simplified
       model of the memory system will be beneficial for us and will make it easier
       for curious readers to dive deeper into this topic.
            In its simplest form, a memory chip provides the following pins:
           •    A set of address pins, designated from A0 to AN, where N is one less
                than the system’s native word size.
           •    A set of data pins, designated from D0 to DN, where again N is one less
                than the native word size.
           •    A set of control pins that allow the processor to command the mem-
                ory. These include the CS (chip select), OE (output enable), and WR/RD
                (write/read) pins. CS activates the memory chip, OE controls whether
                data is placed on the output pins or they remain in a high-impedance
                state (see the “Buses” box on page 82 for more on this), and WR/RD
                indicates whether the operation is a write or a read.

                                                     Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   81
     NOTE        In digital electronics, a line over a signal name indicates negation, so WR/RD means
                 we want to write when the signal is a 1 and read when the signal is negated (that is,
                 when it’s a 0).
                     The CPU has similar pins that are connected to the memory. When the
                 CPU wants to read a value from the memory, it places the address to access
                 on its address pins, which are connected to the memory chip’s address pins,
                 usually by a bus (discussed in the following box). The appropriate control
                 signal is then activated on the memory chip, in this case enabling the OE and
                 CS pins and setting WR/RD to 0 to select a read operation. This triggers the
                 memory to place the value from the indicated memory address onto its data
                 pins so the CPU can read it.
                     Remember, this is a simplified model. In reality, a lot more goes on
                 when accessing memory.


                                                          BUSES

                      A simple bus is just a bunch of wires connecting all the chips in a computer
                      system together. To prevent conflicts, the chips must have some internal circuitry
                      to process input signals (activated by the CS pin) and to allow the output pins to
                      enter a third state (in addition to the normal low and high states) where they
                      present a very high resistance, or impedance (activated by the OE pin), so no
                      current flows through them. In this high-impedance state, the pins are effectively
                      disconnected from the bus, so they don’t interfere with signals from other chips.
                      Control logic ensures that the CS and OE signals are properly issued to all chips
                      in the bus, so that only one (apart from the CPU) can use it at any given time.
                      What makes one bus different from another are the specific control signals
                      and protocols they use to interchange information. The S-100 bus was one of
                      the first created for microcomputers. The Versa Module Eurocard (VME) was
                      another popular bus used on more powerful machines. The Industrial Standard
                      Architecture (ISA) was the selected expansion bus for the first PCs, but nowadays
                      most computers use Peripheral Component Interconnect Express (PCIe) for that
                      purpose.



                    Figure 3-5 is a basic diagram of the interface between the CPU and the
                 memory chip, without the control signals.


                 ----+                          +-----------
                     +- A0 --------------- A0 -+
                     +- ... -------------- ... -+
                 CPU +- A31--------------- A31 -+ Memory
                     +- ...                     |
                     +- D0 ---------------- D0 -+
                     +- ... -------------- ... -+
                     +- D31 -------------- D31 -+
                 ----+                          +------------

                 Figure 3-5: The connections between the CPU and memory

82   Chapter 3
     The address and data pins on the processor and memory are connected
by tracks in the motherboard. Activating and deactivating those pins is what
makes the computer work. Let’s use some concrete numbers to better un-
derstand this. Imagine that the RIP register (the instruction pointer on x86_64)
is set to 4, meaning the instruction at address 4 is the next one to execute.
The CPU has to read that instruction from memory, so it puts the value 4,
which in binary is 0b100, on the address bus. Figure 3-6 illustrates the process.


----+                                +-----------
    +- A0 -------- 0 ---------- A0 -+ <--- Address bus
    +- A1 -------- 0 ---------- A1 -+
    +- A2 -------- 1 ---------- A2 -+
    +- A3 -------- 0 ---------- A3 -+
    +- ... ------- 0 ---------- ... -+
CPU +- A31 ------- 0 ---------- A31 -+ Memory
    +- WR/RD ---- 0 -------- WR/RD -+ <--- Read command
    +- D0 -------- 0 ---------- D0 -+
    +- D1 -------- 0 ---------- D1 -+
    +- ...                           |

Figure 3-6: Preparing for memory access by setting the address bus
and activating the read signal

    Only pin A2 is set, which corresponds to the address 4 in binary. When
the RD control signal is activated, the memory chip will access the value stored
at address 4. Activating a pin means setting a given voltage on it. In this case,
we need a logic value of 0, which usually means 0 volts. The voltage for a 1
depends on the technology used; it might be 5 V, 3.3 V, or even less.
    Next, the memory chip puts the value from address 4 on its data pins so
the CPU can read it. This is illustrated in Figure 3-7.


----+                                +-----------
    +- A0 -------- X ---------- A0 -+
    +- A1 -------- X ---------- A1 -+
    +- A2 -------- X ---------- A2 -+
    +- A3 -------- X ---------- A3 -+
    +- ... ------- X ---------- ... -+
CPU +- A31-------- X ---------- A31 -+ Memory
    +- WR/RD ---- X -------- WR/RD -+
    +- D0 -------- 1 ---------- D0 -+ <--- Data is actually read
    +- D1 -------- 1 ---------- D1 -+
    +- ...                           |

Figure 3-7: Retrieving the value from memory through the data bus

    As each memory location is 8 bits, we only need 8 physical pins to send
the value from address 4 to the CPU. But since there are 32 data pins, only

                                              Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   83
                 reading the one address would be a huge waste. As such, the memory typi-
                 cally doesn’t put just the 1 byte that was requested on its data pins: It puts as
                 much on as it can. In this example, that means it will output 4 bytes, starting
                 from address 4, using the 32 data lines on the bus.
                      At this stage, the values on the address pins are no longer needed. Some
                 processors take advantage of this and use the same pins to set the memory
                 address and to write or read the values at that address. That’s fine, as long as
                 the processor is given some time to read the address and access the memory
                 position before the pins are reset.
                      Again, note that this is a simplified example. In reality, there are a few
                 more lines involved than we’ve discussed here. Also, sometimes the memory
                 only has a data bus that’s 8 bits long, and multiple memory chips are used
                 to access 16-, 32-, or 64-bit words. In those cases, there’s a real physical con-
                 straint with regard to memory-aligned accesses. These details can make a big
                 difference between two systems.
                      For a more complete picture of how memory access works, you’ll have to
                 consult the datasheet of the particular processor you’re using. The memory
                 system also has its own datasheet, which you’ll need to check when building
                 your hardware. The datasheets should include chronograms diagramming
                 the exact timing of different memory transactions; see the “Chronograms”
                 box for more on what these look like.

                                                     CHRONOGRAMS

                     The bus interactions between chips are usually represented with chronograms in
                     the chips’ datasheets. These are graphs that show all the processor lines and
                     how they vary with time. At the top you’ll typically see the system clock signal (CLK),
                     which orchestrates the activation and deactivation of each of the processor
                     signals.
                     The chronograms don’t just provide information about the sequence of signals
                     to activate; they also indicate access time or other delays that may happen. For
                     example, the following simplified chronogram represents the memory read
                     access described in the previous section:
                                     t=0      t=1       t=2         t=3         t=4   t=5

                          CLK


                       WR/RD


                                              addr                        XXX
                      A0--A31


                                               XXX            val               XXX
                      D0--D31


                     At the top, you can see the system clock. Different things happen when this
                     signal changes, but not every edge triggers an event; some signals may be
                     active for several clock edges. The other lines appear below the clock. The data
                     and address buses are usually represented as a combination of lines, since



84   Chapter 3
    showing each line individually wouldn’t be helpful and would make the
    diagram huge.
    This particular chronogram tells us that:

        •     The processor puts the address value on the bus at t0.
        •     At t1, it sets the WR/ RD signal low. This tells the memory to read the
              address internally and start to retrieve the data. The amount of time
              for which the lines need to be set depends on the memory chip.
        •     After a while (that’s the memory access time), the memory chip outputs
              the value to the data bus and the CPU can finally read the value.

    Real chronograms show many more signals, to allow the hardware designer to
    properly interconnect the different chips in the computer.



Native Word Size and Memory Alignment
I’ve already hinted that there’s a relationship between a processor’s native
word size and the functionality of the rest of the computer. For example,
a 32-bit processor will interface to a 32-bit memory system. (It’s not that
straightforward, but that’s roughly what happens; when I say system, that may
actually mean several chips.)
     Imagine you want to read just 1 byte. You put your desired address on
the address lines and ask the memory chip to spit out the content of that
address. The memory chip will retrieve the data at that address and the next
three addresses and place it on the data lines. The CPU will then read those
4 bytes from the bus but take just the lower 8 bits from that value. In a sense,
that requires more work than just reading the whole 32-bit value into a 32-bit
register: The CPU has to consciously discard 3 of the 4 bytes.
     To cut a long story short, a 32-bit processor will access 32-bit-aligned
memory, meaning chunks of memory starting from addresses that are mul-
tiples of 4: 0, 4, 8, 12, 16, and so on. Deviating from this alignment creates
more work. For example, if we need to access a doubleword that starts at
address 2, the processor will have to read addresses 0 through 3, then ad-
dresses 4 through 7, and then reorder the bytes from those two reads to
get the single 32-bit value from addresses 2 through 5. This is why memory
alignment is so important. Some processors will raise an exception when ac-
cessing unaligned memory. Others will just slow down. Still others may do
both, depending on what you’re trying to do. Fortunately, unless you really
try to do otherwise on purpose, the compiler will generally ensure that you
access memory the right way.
     What I just described is a very simplified example to illustrate how a pro-
cessor works more efficiently when everything aligns with its native internal
word size. The reality is more complex, but unless you need to design your
own computer (the motherboard, at least), it doesn’t really matter, especially
with today’s large cache memories. The main takeaway from all this is that



                                                Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   85
                 it’s always better to use the processor’s native word size and to access data
                 aligned to that size.


                 Little vs. Big Endian
                 We know the importance of using the processor’s native word size and the
                 right memory alignment now. So far, so good, but there’s one more thing to
                 take into account: How are the bytes of dwords, qwords, and other multibyte
                 pieces of data mapped between the memory and a processor’s registers?
                       Let’s assume that the native word size of our processor is 4 bytes (that
                 is, it’s a 32-bit processor), and that we have the memory layout shown in
                 Figure 3-8.


                 | ...    | Drawer ...
                 +--------+
                 | 0x44 | Drawer p + 3
                 +--------+
                 | 0x33 | Drawer p + 2
                 +--------+
                 | 0x22 | Drawer p + 1
                 +--------+
                 | 0x11 | Drawer p
                 +--------+

                 Figure 3-8: A hypothetical
                 memory layout

                     Now, let’s assume that we want to read the content of addresses p through
                 p + 3 into one of our 32-bit registers. Which of the following values do you
                 think we’ll get?
                     a)   0x44332211
                     b)   0x11223344

                       The answer is: It depends on the processor. If our processor is little
                 endian, we’ll get the first value. If it’s big endian, we’ll get the second value.
                 Most of the processors we’re using in this book are little endian, although
                 ARM can be configured to work as big endian. MIPS processors are usually
                 big endian, but you can find little-endian hardware out there too. For the
                 purposes of this book, we’ll consider MIPS to be big endian and ARM to be
                 little endian.
                       In general, you don’t have to worry about whether your processor is big
                 or little endian. You can just write and read values to and from memory, and
                 the processor will do the right thing. Endianness only becomes important
                 when you have to send data between computers, as the sender and receiver
                 may have different endiannesses. This happens frequently in network pro-
                 gramming when using open protocols that have to work with any kind of


86   Chapter 3
        machine. We’ll see examples later in the book. For now, just keep in mind
        that different processors may read data in different ways.
            But enough introduction. Let’s see how all these concepts can be put to
        practical use by writing a traditional “Hello, world!” program.


“Hello, World!” in ASM
        I’m pretty sure you’re familiar with the classic “Hello, world!” programs that
        display the message “Hello, world!” in the console. In fact, we wrote a sim-
        ple one that used libc functions in Chapter 2. Let’s create another one now,
        entirely in ASM. Then we’ll see how the program translates to C.
             The way to display a message like “Hello, world!” on Linux is to write it
        to the standard output (usually the console) using the SYS_write system call,
        which expects three parameters:

               File descriptor The file or device to write to. Broadly speaking, a file
               descriptor represents a file, and in the Unix world, everything is a file.
               In this case, we’ll need file descriptor 1, which is always associated with
               stdout. We’ll discuss file descriptors in more detail in Chapter 6. For
               now, you just need to know that if you pass 1 as the first parameter to
               SYS_write, you’ll be writing to the console.
               Buffer The memory address containing the data we want to write to
               the file descriptor provided in the first parameter.
               Length The number of bytes we want to write, starting at the address
               provided in the second parameter.

            Remember that you can check section 2 of the Unix manual to get all
        the details about any system call, using the command man 2 syscall. Just re-
        move the SYS_ from the syscall name.
            On the x86_64 architecture, the SYS_write system call has the identifier 1.
        Knowing this, and applying everything we learned in Chapter 2 about invok-
        ing system calls, Listing 3-1 shows what our little program looks like.

            global _start
        _start: mov rax, 1     ; SYS_write = 1
            mov rdi, 1         ; fd = 1
            mov rsi, msg       ; buf = msg
            mov rdx, 14        ; count = 14 (the number of bytes to write)
            syscall            ; (SYS_write = rax(1), fd = rdi, buf = rsi, count = rdx)

            ;; Exit program
            mov rax, 0x3c   ; SYS_exit = 0x3c
            mov rdi, 0      ; status = 0
            syscall         ; (SYS_exit = rax , status = rdi)

        msg:      db 'Hello, world!', 0x0a

        Listing 3-1: A “Hello, world!” program in ASM for Intel x86_64


                                                      Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   87
                     I hope you can identify the two system calls in there. The first one writes
                 the message, and the second one exits the program with status 0.
                     Let’s compile the program, following the same steps we used at the start
                 of Chapter 2, then run it:

                 $ nasm -f elf64 -o hello.x86.o x86-hello.asm
                 $ x86_64-linux-gnu-ld -o hello.x86 hello.x86.o
                 $ qemu-x86_64-static ./hello.x86
                 Hello, world!

                     Once you’ve verified that it works, there are some key new elements in
                 our program that we need to discuss.


                 Labels and Assembler Commands
                 The first key element in our program is the msg label. A label is a name used
                 to reference a part of a program (actually, a memory address). We’ve already
                 seen these at work in the past—for example, the _start label we used in
                 Chapter 2. In this case, msg references our “Hello, world!” message. In gen-
                 eral, we don’t know where in memory our program will be loaded, and using
                 symbolic names like msg lets us write programs without caring about those
                 details. Wherever the data representing “Hello, world!” ends up in memory,
                 msg will refer to that location. In this way, labels can make programs easier to
                 read and modify.
                      The second key thing to highlight is the db instruction paired with the
                 msg label. This is an assembler directive, an instruction that’s understood only
                 by the assembler and doesn’t directly translate into an opcode in the pro-
                 gram. We’ve also seen assembler directives before, such as global.
                      The db assembler directive, likely short for define byte or data byte, allows
                 us to set some memory area with a sequence of bytes. In this case, our db in-
                 struction has two parts, separated by a comma. The first part is the string
                 'Hello, world!'. The assembler will output one byte per character in the
                 string, starting at position msg. The second part is an extra byte, expressed
                 in hexadecimal: 0x0a. Sure, you could just use the decimal value (10) instead,
                 and everything would stay the same. This is the ASCII code for a line feed,
                 meaning it will move the cursor to the next line in the console. Try remov-
                 ing it, and see what happens to your output. With db, you could also write
                 your whole string as a list of the ASCII codes for each character, separated
                 by commas, but that wouldn’t be very practical.
                     Exercise Use the SYS_unlink system call (87) to write a program named
                     ghost that will delete itself every time it’s executed. For this exercise, as-
                     sume the name of the program is always ghost.


                 Pointers
                 There’s one more key feature of our “Hello, world!” program that we need
                 to highlight: a pointer.


88   Chapter 3
     Okay, don’t panic. You may have heard that pointers are the trickiest
part of low-level programming, but they’re actually a lot simpler than you
might think. Furthermore, you can’t do much in ASM without using them.
Just repeat to yourself that you have to understand pointers to create cool
things like shellcodes. Take a deep breath, repeat it again, and let’s dive in.
     A pointer is just a position in memory that contains the address of an-
other position in memory. Remember, a memory address is just a number.
The content of a given memory address is also just a number. It’s therefore
only natural that the number stored at a memory address could itself be in-
terpreted as some other memory address.
     One thing you may figure out from this recursive definition is that a
pointer’s size has to be equal to the number of address pins in the proces-
sor. In other words, it has to be the size of the address bus, which is usually
the same as the processor’s native word size. A 32-bit processor with a 32-bit
address bus (for example, the Intel 386) will require 32 bits (4 bytes) to store
any potential memory address a program could reference. A pointer on a
32-bit machine will therefore take up four consecutive positions in mem-
ory. (Remember, each position holds a single byte.) Likewise, for a 64-bit
processor with a 64-bit address bus, a pointer will need 64 bits (8 bytes) to
reference any possible memory address. A pointer on a 64-bit machine will
therefore be stored in eight consecutive memory addresses. The entire range
of memory addresses a processor can reference is known as the addressing
space.
     Let’s look at an example. Suppose we have the memory layout shown in
Figure 3-9.


| ...    | p + 4 = 0x400004
+--------+
| 0x40 | p + 3 = 0x400003
+--------+
| 0x00 | p + 2 = 0x400002
+--------+
| 0x00 | p + 1 = 0x400001
+--------+
| 0x04 | p       = 0x400000
+--------+

Figure 3-9: A pointer in memory

     On a 32-bit little-endian machine, the 4 bytes at memory addresses p
(0x40000000) through p + 3 (0x40000003) can be read together as having the
value 0x40000004. If we interpret this as a pointer, or a memory address stor-
ing another memory address, we can say that address 0x40000000 points at
(stores) address 0x40000004.
     What does all this have to do with our “Hello, world!” program? Tak-
ing into account that a register can be seen as a special kind of memory,
whenever we store a memory address in a register, we can consider that

                                          Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   89
                 register to be a pointer. With that in mind, take a look at this line from our
                 ASM code:

                 mov rsi, msg

                       Here, we store the value of msg in the RSI register. As we’ve already dis-
                 cussed, msg is just a label for the memory address where our message is stored.
                 In this context, RSI contains a pointer to the message: It’s a memory location
                 (a register, in this case) storing another memory location that we’re inter-
                 ested in.
                       In general, whenever we need to pass some information that’s too big
                 to be stored in a register to a system call, we need to store that information
                 somewhere else in memory and give the system call a pointer (which can
                 fit in a register) to the relevant memory address. In our example, the string
                 "Hello, world!" requires 13 bytes, plus an extra byte for the line feed, and our
                 registers can only store 8 bytes on a 64-bit platform. To make the system call
                 work for all cases and not just for data blocks of 8 bytes, SYS_write expects
                 the data to write to be somewhere in memory, and it expects to receive that
                 location (a pointer) as a parameter via a register.
                       Strictly speaking, RSI is the pointer here, but it’s more common to re-
                 fer to the memory address stored in RSI as the pointer. The indirection is
                 implicit in the pointer definition, and it’s really the target address that we’re
                 interested in. In other words, even though technically the pointer is the ad-
                 dress containing an address, in general, people call the address itself the
                 pointer.
                       Most of the time, pointers will be true memory addresses, not registers,
                 but the concept is the same. The names of some registers actually reflect
                 this role: The instruction pointer, the stack pointer, and the frame pointer are
                 three of the most famous cases.


     “Hello, World!” in C
                 Now let’s see how to write the same “Hello, world!” program in C. We’ll
                 learn a few more things about the C language and its associated tools in the
                 process. Listing 3-2 shows the code.

                 #include <unistd.h>

                 int main ()
                 {
                   register void *p = "Hello, world!\n";
                   write (1, p, 14);
                   _exit (0);
                 }

                 Listing 3-2: A “Hello, world!” program in C

                     Again, notice the two system calls in the program, write and _exit. We
                 already know that the second parameter to write has to be a pointer, a

90   Chapter 3
       memory address containing the address in memory of the string to print.
       We pass the variable p, which we declare with the register keyword. As men-
       tioned in Chapter 1, you don’t typically use this keyword in C programs,
       but we include it here to force the compiler to produce machine code that
       uses the processor’s registers. Without it, the compiler will simply allocate a
       regular memory block of 8 bytes (for a 64-bit machine) in which it will store
       the pointer—the address where our message is located, in this case.
           Let’s take a look at the assembly generated by gcc. We’ll create a non-
       position-independent executable, as that makes it easier to spot the pointer:

       $ x86_64-linux-gnu-gcc -no-pie -fno-pic -o hello hello.c
       $ x86_64-linux-gnu-objdump -d -M intel hello
       --snip--
       0000000000400544 <main>:
           400544:   55                      push rbp
           400545:   48 89 e5                mov    rbp, rsp
           400548:   53                      push rbx
           400549:   48 83 ec 08             sub    rsp, 0x8
           40054d:   bb 5c 06 40 00       ¶ mov     ebx, 0x40065c
           400552:   ba 0d 00 00 00          mov    edx, 0xd
           400557:   48 89 de             · mov     rsi, rbx
           40055a:   bf 01 00 00 00          mov    edi, 0x1
           40055f:   e8 dc fe ff ff          call 400440 <write@plt>
           400564:   bf 00 00 00 00          mov    edi, 0x0
           400569:   e8 c2 fe ff ff          call 400430 <_exit@plt>
       --snip--

           Skipping over the first four instructions in the resulting ASM (that’s
       stack stuff, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 4), try to find the pointer. Have
       you spotted it? Look at how we set EBX (the 32-bit part of RBX) to 0x40065c ¶,
       then copy RBX into RSI ·. And what do you think 0x40065c is? A memory ad-
       dress, of course! That once again makes RSI a pointer: a memory location
       holding the address of another memory location.

NOTE   The exact memory address you see being assigned to EBX in your output may vary,
       depending on your system configuration. Take note of that address, as you’ll need it
       in a minute.
           To find out what our pointer is pointing to, let’s introduce a new friend,
       the GNU Debugger (gdb).


       Using the GNU Debugger
       A debugger like gdb is a program that allows us to execute other programs and
       look inside them. Do you remember in Chapter 2, when I said that the oper-
       ating system makes sure that a process can’t see inside the memory assigned
       to another process? Well, that’s still correct. A debugger uses a special sys-
       tem call to do its work, so technically it’s the OS looking into the other pro-
       cess’s memory and reporting what it finds to the debugger.

                                                   Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   91
                      A debugger is able to load a binary in memory and process all its meta-
                 data (the ELF details added during compiling and linking), including the
                 code itself and any data stored in the program. It can then examine the con-
                 tents of the memory associated with the program. Later, we’ll learn how
                 to figure out the address where the program data actually gets loaded, but
                 for now we can just use the debugger to inspect the contents of arbitrary
                 locations.
                      Technically, the debugger launches the program to debug as a new pro-
                 cess, then attaches itself to that process using the SYS_ptrace syscall. This al-
                 lows the debugger to control the target process and access its memory, as
                 well as the values of its registers. In other words, the SYS_ptrace syscall is what
                 enables debugging. Prior to this, the debugger can only read the program’s
                 file on disk and use the metadata stored in it to help us inspect its structure.
                      Let’s use gdb to see what’s at the memory address our pointer is pointing
                 to (remember that the exact memory address you need to look at may vary):

                 $ gdb ./hello
                 (gdb) x/s 0x40065c
                 0x40065c:    "Hello, world!\n"

                      In gdb, the x command allows us to dump memory contents to the con-
                 sole. Here, it shows us that the memory location the pointer is referencing
                 holds our “Hello, world!” message.
                      The x command must be followed by the type of data we want to see. In
                 this case, we pass s for strings, but you can, for instance, pass i for processor
                 instructions, a for addresses, or t for binary values. The command is a bit
                 more powerful than this, but that’s all you need to know for now. See the gdb
                 manual if you want more details.

     NOTE        If you aren’t working on an x86_64 machine, you may have a problem using gdb
                 directly on an x86_64 binary. See Appendix B for information on how to debug pro-
                 grams for other processors using qemu and gdb-multiarch.

                 Declaring Pointers in C
                 As you may have already guessed by looking at the code in Listing 3-2, point-
                 ers in C are declared using the * symbol. In our code, *p creates a pointer
                 called p that references the memory location where the “Hello, world!” mes-
                 sage is stored:

                 register void *p = "Hello, world!\n";

                     There’s a little more to pointers than that, since in C we also need to
                 specify the data type. In this case, the data type doesn’t really make a differ-
                 ence, so we’ve used void. In most cases, however, the pointer type is impor-
                 tant and useful. The standard syntax is:

                 type *pointer_name;



92   Chapter 3
    This declares a pointer called pointer_name to a memory address con-
taining a value of a certain data type (type). Table 3-1 lists the basic types C
provides.

Table 3-1: C Data Types
  C type      Data type        Description
  char        Byte             Minimal addressable element (not necessarily 8 bits)
  int         Integer          Default integer type
  short       Integer          Usually half the size of the default int
  long        Integer          Usually double the size of the default int
  float       Floating point   Single-precision floating point
  double      Floating point   Double-precision floating point
  void        Nothing          Nothing or anything


    C also supports compound types and allows us to define our own new
types, but for the time being, the ones in Table 3-1 will be enough for our
purposes.


                                    CHAR VS. BYTE

        In C, a char is defined as a byte, and a byte is defined by the C standard as
        the size required to store a character on a given platform. That may sound
        circular, but it opens up the possibility that a byte could be something other
        than 8 bits. In fact, 6-bit bytes were common in mainframes and minicomputers
        during the 1960s and early 1970s, and some machines used 5-, 7-, or 9-bit
        bytes.
        Nowadays, the size of the byte type is 8 bits (an octet) on nearly all systems.
        For the rare exceptions, C defines the CHAR_BIT constant, which indicates how
        many bits define a character for the platform in question. Digital signal pro-
        cessors (DSPs) are one type of system where you might find different byte sizes.
        For example, the Texas Instruments C54x and TMS320 DSPs define CHAR_BIT
        as 16 bits.


    Listing 3-3 shows a simple program you can use to figure out the size
of each type on your system and better understand the differences between
those types.

#include <stdio.h>
int main ()
{
¶ printf ("Size of void* : %ld\n", sizeof(void*));
  printf ("Size of short : %ld\n", sizeof(short));
  printf ("Size of int    : %ld\n", sizeof(int));
  printf ("Size of long   : %ld\n", sizeof(long));
  printf ("Size of float : %ld\n", sizeof(float));
  printf ("Size of double : %ld\n", sizeof(double));

                                                  Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   93
                     return 0;
                 }

                 Listing 3-3: Showing the sizes of the main C types in bytes

                      This program uses the sizeof operator, which returns the size, in bytes,
                 of a given data type or variable. We display the results with the printf func-
                 tion, short for print formatted (see the “Format Strings and Type Conversion”
                 box for more on how this works). Notice in particular how we check the size
                 of void* ¶. This is a pointer to void, meaning a pointer to anything. That’s
                 what we used in our “Hello, world!” program, and it’s the C equivalent of
                 the pointer we used in our original ASM code. If you compile and run the
                 test program in Listing 3-3, it will show you that void* has a size of 4 bytes on
                 a 32-bit platform, or 8 bytes on a 64-bit platform.


                                 FORMAT STRINGS AND TYPE CONVERSION

                       The printf function used in Listing 3-3 lets us print messages using format
                       strings to compose complex outputs. In this case, we use the %ld format string
                       to print the long value returned by sizeof. This basically tells printf, “I have a
                       number here that I want you to convert into a string. Please do that for me.”
                       The idea of type conversion may be confusing if you’re used to high-level pro-
                       gramming languages like JavaScript, where many transformations are done
                       automatically, but it’s a necessary part of low-level programming. Anything
                       printed to the console, even a number, needs to be provided as a string—that
                       is, a sequence of characters. Internally, though, numbers and characters are
                       represented differently, so some conversion needs to take place prior to
                       printing.
                       Take the number 123. As an integer, it can be stored in just 1 byte, but to print
                       it out you need to convert it to individual characters: 1, 2, and 3. For our pur-
                       poses, C represents characters using ASCII codes, each of which requires
                       1 byte of storage. As a string, the number 123 therefore becomes the byte
                       sequence 0x31, 0x32, 0x33, 0x00. That’s 4 bytes: one for each digit, plus
                       the final 0x00 to indicate the end of the string. Luckily, the %ld format string
                       handles that conversion for us.
                       There are lots of other % format codes you can use with printf. You can find
                       details about the available options on the printf man page. Note also that
                       printf is defined in stdio.h, which is why we include that file at the start of
                       Listing 3-3.




     Writing Your First Shellcode
                 A shellcode, in its simplest form, is a piece of code that fires up a shell. It’s
                 usually fed into a vulnerable program using an exploit, effectively enabling
                 the attacker to acquire a shell with the same privileges as that program. At-
                 tackers typically target processes running as root, to get full access to the
                 machine.


94   Chapter 3
     We’ll leave exploiting a vulnerable program to Chapter 4, but believe
it or not, you’ve already learned everything you need to write a very basic
shellcode. Just like a “Hello, world!” program, all it takes is a pointer and the
right system call.
     Our shellcode won’t be usable in the wild, but it’s still instructive to
learn about it. If you’re curious about why it’s not usable, the problem is
that shellcodes usually make it into memory through a standard C function
that copies strings. As we’ve discussed, C strings are delimited with the value
0x00 (also known as the null byte), but that value will also appear as part of
our shellcode, which will prevent the string copy function from copying the
whole program. Once you understand how the shellcode works, you can
read the classic article “Smashing the Stack for Fun and Profit” by Aleph
One (Phrack Magazine, 1996) to learn more about this issue and some tricks
for avoiding it.
     In the coming sections, we’ll look at how to construct a shellcode for
each of our hardware platforms of interest, starting with x86_64.


x86_64
In Linux, you can execute a process (for example, starting a command shell)
using the SYS_execve system call, which on the x86_64 platform has the num-
ber 59 (0x3b). This system call takes three parameters, but for now we need
only the first one, a pointer to the name of the program to run. We’ll set the
other parameters to 0. Listing 3-4 shows our basic shellcode.

    section .text
    global _start

_start:
    mov rax, 0x3b       ; SYS_execve
    mov rdi, cmd        ; char *cmd
    mov rsi, 0          ; No argv
    mov rdx, 0          ; No env

    syscall

cmd:     db '/bin/sh', 0

Listing 3-4: A shellcode for Intel x86_64

    Notice how similar this is to our “Hello, world!” program. We assign a
label (cmd) to a string, but this time our string is '/bin/sh', the name of the
shell we want to launch, instead of a message to print. Then we create a
pointer to this string in a register (RDI) and invoke a system call—this time
SYS_execve instead of SYS_write. We no longer need the SYS_exit system call,
since SYS_execve is another one of those system calls that doesn’t give control
back to the calling process. See its man page (man 2 execve) for more on this.



                                            Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   95
                                    HOW PROCESSES ARE EXECUTED

                     When we run a program from the command line, we usually specify the name
                     of the binary to run plus a set of arguments. Such a request doesn’t go straight
                     to the kernel but rather to the command line interpreter, which uses the kernel’s
                     services to get a new process running. This involves creating the process (we
                     will see how to do that in Chapter 6), then loading the requested binary. This
                     second step is done with the SYS_execve system call, which has the following
                     libc wrapper:

                     int execve (const char *pathname, char *const _Nullable argv[],
                                       char *const _Nullable envp[]);


                     When the kernel runs the SYS_execve system call, it loads the binary in memory
                     according to the ELF metadata and sets up a special memory area known as the
                     stack (which will become your best friend in Chapter 4) with the last two para-
                     meters, which represent the command line arguments and the environment
                     variables. Both of these parameters are in the command line interpreter’s pro-
                     cess, and only the kernel can copy those values into the address space of the
                     new process.
                     When the new process starts execution at its entry point, the command line
                     arguments and environment variables are made available to that process via
                     the stack. From this point on, it’s up to the process what to do with that infor-
                     mation. For C programs, the C runtime code in crt1.o will process this informa-
                     tion and provide it to the main function as three parameters using the proper
                     ABI, so the C program can easily access it if needed. With that said, do you
                     remember that I told you in Chapter 2 that there’s a third way of declaring
                     main? Here it is:

                     int main (int argc, char *argv[], char *envp[])


                     This style of declaration gives main access to the environment variables as well
                     as the command line arguments. And now you also know where that third
                     parameter comes from: Yep, the SYS_execve system call.



                      You may be wondering why the shell we launch is called /bin/sh. That
                 doesn’t match the name of any of the shells you may have heard of, like
                 bash, dash, zsh, or ksh. And that’s just it: There are so many different shells
                 out there that just about any Unix system keeps a symbolic link to the pre-
                 ferred shell, whatever it may be, at /bin/sh.
                      The system has to run shell scripts all the time. For example, there are
                 shell scripts that are executed during the boot process, whenever you start
                 or stop a service, and when you launch some applications. If those scripts ex-
                 plicitly referenced a particular shell, imagine what would happen if the user
                 wanted to change their default shell. For them to keep working, the system
                 would have to update all of those scripts, and you’d have to update all the
                 scripts you’ve written that the system knows nothing about. This would also
                 force all system users to use the same shell. This is why most Unix systems



96   Chapter 3
have a binary at /bin/sh that runs the user’s preferred shell. Shell scripts rely
on the existence of that file to work, regardless of the particular shell used.


ARM32
We should be able to port our x86_64 ASM shellcode to ARM32 very easily.
Listing 3-5 shows what it looks like.

    .text
    .globl _start

_start:
    mov r7, #11     @ SYS_execve

    ldr r0, =cmd    @ Command
    mov r1, #0      @ No env
    mov r2, #0      @ No argv

    svc #0
cmd:
    .asciz "/system/bin/sh"

Listing 3-5: A shellcode for ARM32

     This code is for Android, which deviates from the standard Linux folder
structure in that the default shell is no longer at /bin/sh but instead at
/system/bin/sh. If you’re going to test the code on another ARM platform,
such as a BeagleBone Black, a BananaPi, or an Olinuxino running a stan-
dard Linux distro (usually Debian), or if you’re going to use qemu in your
development container, just change the string to the well-known location
/bin/sh. The rest of the code should work fine.
     We can compile the program like this:

$ arm-linux-gnueabi-as -o arm_sc.o arm_sc.s
$ arm-linux-gnueabi-ld -o arm_sc arm_sc.o
$ arm-linux-gnueabi-readelf -S arm_sc | grep ".text"
  [ 1] .text           PROGBITS      00010054 000054 000020 00                   AX    0      0     4

This produces a shellcode of 32 bytes (0x20 in hexadecimal).
     Let’s take a closer look at the code. First, notice how we use .asciz to
add the shell location to memory instead of db. This is a GNU Assembler
instruction, and it’s available independent of the processor. It’s similar to
nasm’s db instruction, but it automatically adds the requisite zero at the end
of the string so we don’t have to do that explicitly (that’s what the z in asciz
means).
     Second, notice that we have to use ldr (load register) to load our pointer
into register r0. When receiving a 32-bit immediate value (like the memory
address referenced by msg), ldr is an ARM pseudo-instruction. The bottom
line is that you can’t directly load a 32-bit value into a register on an ARM

                                           Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode       97
                 processor. I won’t go into the details, but roughly, ARM produces 32-bit
                 machine code for all instructions (there’s another mode for 16 bits, but we
                 won’t talk about that for now). This limits the size of the values that can be
                 directly loaded into a register by one of those 32-bit machine code instruc-
                 tions: We would need the whole 32 bits for the value, so there wouldn’t be
                 any bits left to indicate which instruction we want to use the value with.
                      To get around this, the assembler expands the ldr pseudo-instruction
                 into the right sequence of actual instructions to load the 32-bit value in a
                 register. You’ll find a similar workaround in other RISC processors since,
                 like ARM, they’re designed to use a fixed size for instructions. CISC proces-
                 sors like Intel’s x86_64 allow a variable number of bytes per instruction, so
                 they don’t have this problem.

     NOTE        It’s possible to directly load small values (up to 12 bits) using ldr. The assembler
                 will decide, depending on the value you want to load, whether to use the immediate
                 value or treat ldr as a pseudo-instruction and expand it.

                    If you’re curious, you can use objdump to see the actual machine code ldr
                 produces:

                 $ arm-linux-gnueabi-objdump -d arm_sc

                 arm_sc:      file format elf32-littlearm



                 Disassembly of section .text:

                 00010074 <_start>:
                     10074:   e3a0700b           mov     r7, #11
                     10078:   e59f0008           ldr     r0, [pc, #8]      ; 10088 <_start+0x14>
                     1007c:   e3a01000           mov     r1, #0
                     10080:   e3a02000           mov     r2, #0
                     10084:   ef000000           svc     0x00000000
                     10088:   0002008c           .word   0x0002008c

                      The ldr instruction we wrote that loads a label (a 32-bit pointer) directly
                 into the register is changed into an ldr instruction that uses indirect PC-
                 relative addressing to get the pointer. The assembler will store the pointer
                 to msg near the instruction (at address 0x10088 in this example) and then will
                 load the register r0 by reading the 32-bit value from that address based on
                 an offset from the current address. Because the address is nearby, the offset
                 value will be a small number—much smaller than the 32-bit number we want
                 to load into the register, and small enough to fit as part of the 32-bit ma-
                 chine code (in our example, it’s 8). You’ll see this pattern all over the place
                 in code for the ARM platform.
                     Exercise Use gdb to check that the pointer in the ARM code actually
                     points to the shell path.


98   Chapter 3
A Short Digression on Addressing Modes
Processors provide lots of different methods for accessing values and mem-
ory locations. These are known as addressing modes. So far, we’ve mostly been
using immediate addressing, where we just provide literal values in the assem-
bly code. Here are examples for x86_64 and ARM:

mov rax, 0    ; x86_64

mov r1, #0    ; ARM32

These load the literal value 0 into register RAX or r1, respectively.
     Immediate addressing is the most basic addressing mode, but we need
more than that. For now, I’ll introduce three other modes. You’ll learn about
different ones later, as we need them.
     When the second operand to mov is a register rather than a literal value,
this is called direct addressing or register direct addressing. In effect, this copies
the value from one register into another register.
     The next often-used addressing mode is indirect addressing. This mode is
used when we want to access the content of a memory address. In this case,
the address is provided between parentheses or square brackets (it depends
on the assembly syntax used). Indirect addressing allows us to work with
pointers (memory positions that contain the address of another memory
position). Here are some examples:

mov rax, (0x600200)     ; Loads the content of address 0x600200 in RAX (x86_64)

mov r0,   [0x20008c]    ; Loads the content of address 0x2008c in r0 (ARM)

     Here we specify the memory address literally, but it’s more common to
reference a register containing the desired memory address (or pointer),
like so:

mov rdi, 0x600200
mov rax, (rdi)           ; Loads the content of address 0x600200 in RAX (x86_64)

ldr r1, =0x2008c
mov r0, [r1]             ; Loads the content of address 0x2008c in r0 (ARM)

    Finally, certain processors support PC-relative addressing, where the ad-
dress we want to access is referenced as an offset from the address stored in
the program counter (PC). This is the mode ARM’s ldr pseudo-instruction
uses to load a 32-bit value into a register with a 32-bit opcode, as we dis-
cussed in the last section. Let’s go back to that example:

10078: e59f0008 ldr         r0, [pc, #8]    ; 10088 <_start+0x14>
--snip--
10088: 0002008c .word       0x0002008c

    Remember that brackets indicate we’re reading the content of a mem-
ory address, so the first line says, “Read the value stored at the address

                                             Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   99
                  located 8 bytes (#8) away from where the program counter is right now.”
                  For ARM processors, “where the program counter is right now” is always
                  8 bytes beyond the address of the current instruction. In other words, since
                  all ARM32 instructions are 32 bits, or 4 bytes, pc is pointing two instructions
                  ahead. Most processors just point to the next instruction, but ARM was orig-
                  inally designed as a three-stage pipeline (fetch–decode–execute), similar to
                  the one we saw in Chapter 1, and the designers decided that pc should point
                  to the instruction in the fetch stage. This means that, when executing an in-
                  struction, we’ve already fetched the next two.
                       In our example, the instruction is at address 0x10078, so pc is at 0x10078
                  + 8, or 0x10080. The value we want is 8 bytes ahead of pc, and 0x10080 + 8 is
                  0x10088. Therefore, 0x10088 is where the actual pointer we want to load into r0
                  is stored (0x0002008c, in this case).
                       In ARM jargon, the list of values used together with the ldr instruction
                  to load full 32-bit values is known as the literal pool, and it’s generated auto-
                  matically by the assembler somewhere close to the code that needs access to
                  those values. You usually won’t have to worry about this, as assemblers and
                  compilers will take care of it for you, but it’s good to know how it works.


                  AArch64
                  The code for AArch64 is basically the same as for ARM32. We just have
                  to use the correct registers and a different syscall number, as shown in
                  Listing 3-6.

                      .text
                      .globl _start
                  _start:
                      mov w8, #221
                      mov x1, #0
                      mov x2, #0
                      ldr x0, =cmd
                      svc #0

                  cmd:
                      .asciz "/bin/bash"

                  Listing 3-6: A shellcode for AArch64

                      No surprises here. You can compile the program the usual way:

                  $ aarch64-linux-gnu-as -o aarch64_sc.o aarch64_sc.s
                  $ aarch64-linux-gnu-ld -o aarch64_sc aarch64_sc.o
                  $ aarch64-linux-gnu-readelf -S aarch64_sc | grep -A1 ".text"
                    [ 1] .text             PROGBITS         0000000000400078 00000078
                         0000000000000028 0000000000000000 AX         0     0    8

                      This produces a shellcode of 40 bytes (0x28 in hexadecimal).



100   Chapter 3
MIPS32
The shellcode for MIPS32 is also pretty similar to the ARM32 version.
Listing 3-7 shows what it looks like.

.text
.globl __start
__start:
    li $2, 4011

    la   $4, cmd
    move $5, $0
    and $6, $0, $0

    syscall

cmd:
    .asciz "/bin/bash"

Listing 3-7: A shellcode for MIPS32
     We already know that MIPS uses different register names and syscall
numbers, but there are some other details to highlight. First, as with ARM,
MIPS opcodes are all 32 bits long, and therefore you can’t directly encode an
instruction that loads a 32-bit value. Also like ARM, MIPS provides pseudo-
instructions as a workaround: li (load immediate) and la (load address).
They load smaller, more manageable parts of the 32-bit value into different
registers, then combine those parts together.
     To illustrate, say we have the following li pseudo-instruction:

li $2, 0x11223344

The assembler will convert this to the following two instructions:

lui $1, 0x1122
ori $2, $1, 0x3344

    The lui (load upper word immediate) instruction loads the upper word
of register $1 with 0x1122, so $1 will hold 0x11220000. If you look back at
Table 2-4, you’ll see that register $1 is reserved for pseudo-instructions. Next,
the ori (OR immediate) instruction takes the bitwise OR of register $1 and
the value 0x3344, storing the result in register $2. This operation compares the
two values bit by bit, yielding a 1 for bits where either value (or both) has a 1.
In the end, we get the 32-bit value we want, 0x11223344, in register $2. The la
pseudo-instruction is similar to li, but instead of using ori, it uses addiu (add
immediate unsigned).
    In our shellcode, we use la to store our pointer in register $4. Then we
have to set the other two syscall parameters to 0. We could just use li, but
instead we zero registers $5 and $6 using MIPS’s special $0 or $zero register,
which is always set to 0. I’ve shown two ways of doing this: First, we simply
use move to copy register $zero into register $5, then we perform an AND of

                                          Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   101
                  register $zero and itself, storing the result in register $6. (You could also XOR
                  register $6 with itself.) Remember that the $zero register exists when you ana-
                  lyze MIPS code.
                       Just to get you comfortable with the compilation process, here’s a re-
                  minder of the command line instructions to compile the MIPS version:

                  $ mips-linux-gnu-as -o mips_sc.o mips_sc.s
                  $ mips-linux-gnu-ld -o mips_sc mips_sc.o
                  $ mips-linux-gnu-readelf -S mips_sc | grep ".text"
                    [ 3] .text         PROGBITS        004000d0 0000d0 000020 00    AX   0   0 16

                      The MIPS shellcode is 32 bytes long (0x20 in hexadecimal).


                  MIPS64
                  The shellcode for MIPS64, shown in Listing 3-8, is almost identical to the
                  MIPS32 version. Instead of using the register numbers, we use the regis-
                  ter names, which greatly improves readability. The syscall number is also
                  different.

                  .text
                  .globl __start
                  __start:
                      dli $v0, 5057
                      dla $a0, cmd
                      dli $a1, 0
                      dli $a2, 0

                      syscall

                  cmd:
                      .asciz "/bin/sh"

                  Listing 3-8: A shellcode for MIPS64

                      We’ve swapped li and la for dli and dla (the d stands for double) because
                  now our registers can load up to 64 bits. These are also pseudo-instructions,
                  and they work the same way as the others.
                      You can compile the program using these commands:

                  $ mips64-linux-gnuabi64-as -o mips64_sc.o mips64_sc.s
                  $ mips64-linux-gnuabi64-ld -o mips64_sc mips64_sc.o
                  $ mips64-linux-gnuabi64-readelf -S mips64_sc | grep -A1 ".text"
                    [ 3] .text             PROGBITS         00000001200000f0 000000f0
                         0000000000000030 0000000000000000 AX         0     0     16

                  This produces a slightly bigger file than the 32-bit version: 48 bytes (0x30 in
                  hexadecimal). Let’s take a look at the resulting machine code:

                  $ mips64-linux-gnuabi64-objdump -D mips64_sc
                  --snip--
102   Chapter 3
Disassembly of section .text:

00000001200000f0 <__start>:
    1200000f0:   240213c1          li      v0,5057
    1200000f4:   3c040000          lui     a0,0x0
    1200000f8:   3c012000          lui     at,0x2000
    1200000fc:   64840001          daddiu a0,a0,1
    120000100:   64210118          daddiu at,at,280
    120000104:   0004203c          dsll32 a0,a0,0x0
    120000108:   0081202d          daddu a0,a0,at
    12000010c:   24050000          li      a1,0
    120000110:   24060000          li      a2,0
    120000114:   0000000c          syscall

0000000120000118 <cmd>:
    120000118:   2f62696e          sltiu    v0,k1,26990
    12000011c:   2f736800          sltiu    s3,k1,26624

     In this case, dli is just translated to an li because the value is small enough
to fit in the instruction. The dla pseudo-instruction gets expanded to a few
operations, though. Let’s figure out what’s going on here.
     The cmd string is stored at address 0x120010118, as you can see in the objdump
output. If you don’t believe it, try the following:

$ xxd -r -p 2f62696e2f736800
/bin/sh

    The xxd tool allows us to do hex dumps of data, but it can also do the op-
posite operation using -r (for reverse). The -p option shows the result imme-
diately: Just type the hexadecimal sequence you want to convert and press
ENTER, then press CTRL-C when you’re done.
    Here again is everything the dla pseudo-instruction actually does:

lui a0, 0x00         ; a0 = 0x0
lui at, 0x2000       ; at = 0x0000000020000000
daddiu a0, a0, 1     ; a0 = 0x0000000000000001
daddiu at, at, 280   ; at = 0x0000000020000118
dsll32 a0, a0, 0     ; a0 = 0x0000000100000000
daddu a0, a0, at     ; a0 = 0x0000000120000118

    We’ll break this down step by step:
    1.   As we already know, lui loads an upper word (16 bits). In the sec-
         ond line, it allows us to set bits 31–16 in the lower part of the 64-bit
         register at.
    2.   The daddiu instruction performs an unsigned addition with a given
         value (recall that the i is for immediate).
    3.   The dsll32 instruction is a little tricky. On MIPS32, sll performs a
         logical left shift of a given number of bits (replacing the shifted bits

                                           Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   103
                           with zeros), but the 64-bit version performs a left shift of 32 plus the
                           value of the third operand. In this case, since the third operand is
                           0, we shift left by 32 bits, meaning the lower 32 bits of the 64-bit a0
                           register are moved into the higher 32 bits of the register.
                      4.   The daddu instruction is similar to daddiu, but it uses only registers
                           and no immediate values.
                       After all that, we get the memory address we want, 0x120010118, in reg-
                  ister a0. Jumping through all these hoops is common for a RISC proces-
                  sor like MIPS. The number of available instructions is reduced (that’s what
                  RISC means), so it’s normal to use several instructions to do relatively sim-
                  ple things. In general, you don’t need to care about everything happening
                  under the hood when you use a pseudo-instruction. However, if you’re look-
                  ing to save some bytes here and there, be aware that a single dla instruction
                  actually takes up six 32-bit words, or 24 bytes.
                       As an extra step, try compiling the MIPS 32-bit code with the MIPS
                  64-bit compiler. You may get some warnings about not using the 64-bit ver-
                  sions of instructions (daddu, for example), but you’ll get the same result in
                  the end. MIPS was designed that way: MIPS32 code can be used directly
                  on MIPS64 machines. The main difference between the architectures (leav-
                  ing aside coprocessor and supervised mode) is that registers are 64 bits on
                  MIPS64 and 32 bits on MIPS32. Instructions are even the same length on
                  both (32 bits). As such, I won’t include any more code for MIPS64 in this
                  book, since it will be almost identical to the MIPS32 version. I’ll just talk
                  about MIPS32, which I’ll refer to simply as MIPS from this point on.


                  RISC-V
                  The RISC-V version of our shellcode should appear quite straightforward
                  now that we’ve gone through the ARM and MIPS versions. Listing 3-9 shows
                  the code.

                      .text
                      .globl _start
                  _start:
                      li a7, 221 # SYS_execve
                      la a0, cmd
                      li a1, 0
                      li a2, 0

                      ecall

                  cmd:
                      .asciz "/bin/sh"

                  Listing 3-9: A shellcode for RISC-V

                       You can compile this program using the following commands:


104   Chapter 3
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-as -o riscv64_sc.o riscv64_sc.s
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-ld -o riscv64_sc riscv64_sc.o
$ riscv64-linux-gnu-readelf -S riscv64_sc | grep -A1 ".text"
  [ 1] .text             PROGBITS         00000000000100b0 000000b0
       0000000000000020 0000000000000000 AX         0     0    4

    As usual, the code is almost identical to the MIPS version (it even has
the same size of 32 bytes), and as with the ARM and MIPS versions, la is a
pseudo-instruction. Let’s take a quick look at the generated assembly:

$ riscv64-linux-gnu-objdump -D riscv64_sc

riscv64_sc:     file format elf64-littleriscv



Disassembly of section .text:

00000000000100b0 <_start>:
    100b0:   0dd00893             li      a7,221
    100b4:   00000517             auipc   a0,0x0
    100b8:   01450513             add     a0,a0,20 # 100c8 <cmd>
    100bc:   00000593             li      a1,0
    100c0:   00000613             li      a2,0
    100c4:   00000073             ecall

00000000000100c8 <cmd>:
    100c8:   6e69622f             .word 0x6e69622f
    100cc:   0068732f             .word 0x0068732f

     The li instructions we put in the source code come through unchanged,
but the la pseudo-instruction is substituted with a combination of auipc and
addi. The first instruction, auipc (add upper immediate to program counter),
is the way RISC-V implements PC-relative addressing. It sets the target reg-
ister to the sum of the current program counter and an immediate value
shifted 12 bits to the left. In other words, it adds the immediate value shifted
3 nibbles (3 hexadecimal digits) left:

0x100b4 auipc a0, 0x0     (pc = 0x000100b4)
                           a0 = pc + (0x0 << 12) = pc = 0x000100b4
0x100b8 add a0, a0,20      a0 = 0x000100b4 + 0x14 (20) = 0x000100c8

     Note that when we reference data that’s nearby, auipc will use 0x00 as a
parameter, in which case it just becomes a way to load the value of pc into
a register. The small offset (0x14, or 20, in this case) is then handled by the
subsequent add instruction.
     In general, the program counter points to the next instruction to be ex-
ecuted, but for RISC-V’s auipc, it actually contains the address of the current
instruction. That is, when we’re about to execute auipc, the program counter

                                           Spell of Rebirth: Transmuting Greetings into Shellcode   105
                  hasn’t been incremented yet. Usually, we don’t need to worry about these
                  4 bytes—the assembler will handle that for us—but it’s good to know that
                  there may be small differences between platforms when calculating offsets
                  for different instructions.


      Summary
                  In this chapter, you had your first encounter with pointers in ASM and C,
                  and you learned how to use them together with a system call. You also had
                  your first contact with addressing modes. Using these concepts, we wrote a
                  simple “Hello, world!” program, which coincidentally was almost identical
                  to a very basic shellcode. We took advantage of this to write our first shell-
                  code too.




106   Chapter 3
