   Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson




                                              2
                                    R ANDOMNESS




                    Randomness is found everywhere in cryp-
                    tography: in the generation of secret keys, in
                   encryption schemes, and even in the attacks
                on cryptosystems. Without randomness, cryptog-
          raphy would be impossible because all operations would
          become predictable and therefore insecure.
              This chapter introduces the concept of randomness in the context
          of cryptography and its applications. We discuss pseudorandom number
          generators and how operating systems can produce reliable randomness,
          and we conclude with real examples showing how flawed randomness can
          impact security.


Random or Nonrandom?
          You’ve probably heard the phrase random bits before, but strictly speaking,
          there is no such thing as a series of random bits. What is random is the
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                  algorithm, or process, that produces a series of random bits; therefore, when
                  we say “random bits,” we actually mean randomly generated bits.
                       What do random bits look like? For example, the 8-­bit string 11010110
                  might look more random than 00000000, although both have the same
                  chance of being generated (namely, 1/256). The value 11010110 looks more
                  random than 00000000 because it has the signs typical of a randomly gen-
                  erated value. That is, 11010110 has no obvious pattern.
                       When we see the string 11010110, our brain registers that it has 3 zeros
                  and 5 ones, just like 55 other 8-­bit strings (11111000, 11110100, 11110010,
                  and so on), but only one 8-­bit string has 8 zeros. Because the pattern
                  3-zeros-and-5-ones is more likely to occur than the pattern 8-­zeros, we iden-
                  tify 11010110 as random and 00000000 as non­random, even if they’re not.
                       This example illustrates two types of errors people often make when
                  identifying randomness:
                       Mistaking nonrandomness for randomness ​  ​Thinking that an object
                       was randomly generated simply because it looks random
                       Mistaking randomness for nonrandomness ​  T   ​ hinking that patterns
                       appearing by chance are there for a reason other than chance
                      The distinction between random-­looking and actually random is
                  crucial. Indeed, in crypto, nonrandomness is often synonymous with
                  insecurity.
                      The saying “it happened by chance” reflects the property that from a
                  complex system (in this case, our universe that obeys the laws of physics,
                  deterministic at the macroscopic level and truly random at the subatomic,
                  quantum level) can emerge specific patterns, such as the string 00000000.
                  By the law of large numbers, if many events occur, some won’t look random—­
                  such as a series of sequential numbers in a lottery draw. Many pseudosci-
                  ences and belief systems are in fact cases of mistaking randomness for
                  nonrandomness.


     Randomness as a Probability Distribution
                  Any randomized process is characterized by a probability distribution, which
                  gives all there is to know about the randomness of the process. A probabil-
                  ity distribution, or simply distribution, lists the outcomes of a randomized
                  process where each outcome is assigned a probability.
                       A probability measures the likelihood of an event occurring. It’s expressed
                  as a real number between 0 and 1 where a probability of 0 means impossible
                  and a probability of 1 means certain. For example, when tossing a two-­sided
                  coin, each side has a 1/2 (or 0.5) probability of landing face up, and the
                  probability of a coin landing on its edge has a probability close to 0.
                       A probability distribution must include all possible outcomes such that
                  the sum of all probabilities is 1. Specifically, if there are N possible events,
                  there are N probabilities p1, p 2, . . . , pN with p1 + p 2 + . . . + pN = 1. In the case
                  of the coin toss, the distribution is 1/2 for heads and 1/2 for tails. The sum



26   Chapter 2
   Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

          of both probabilities is equal to 1/2 + 1/2 = 1, because the coin will fall on
          one of its two faces.
              A uniform distribution occurs when all probabilities in the distribution
          are equal, meaning that all outcomes are equally likely to occur. If there are
          N events, then each event has probability 1/N. For example, if a 128-­bit key is
          picked uniformly at random—­that is, according to a uniform distribution—­
          then each of the 2128 possible keys should have a probability of 1/2128.
              In contrast, when a distribution is nonuniform, probabilities aren’t all
          equal. A coin toss with a nonuniform distribution is said to be biased and
          may yield heads with probability 1/4 and tails with probability 3/4, for
          example.

 NOTE     It’s possible to cheat with a loaded die, preventing the probabilities of each of the
          six faces to be 1/6; however, one can’t bias a coin. Coin tosses can be biased only if
          “the coin is allowed to bounce or be spun rather than simply flipped in the air,” as
          described in the article “You Can Load a Die but You Can’t Bias a Coin” (available
          at https://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~nolan/Papers/dice.pdf).


Entropy: A Measure of Uncertainty
          Entropy is the measure of uncertainty, or disorder, in a system. The higher
          the entropy, the less certainty found in the result of a randomized
          process.
               We can compute the entropy of a probability distribution. If your distri-
          bution consists of probabilities p1, p 2, . . . , pN , then its entropy is the nega-
          tive sum of all probabilities multiplied by their logarithm, as shown in this
          expression:

                            − p1 × log ( p 1 ) − p2 × log ( p 2 ) − . . . pN × log ( p N )

              Here the function log is the binary logarithm, or logarithm in base two.
          Unlike the natural logarithm, the binary logarithm expresses the informa-
          tion in bits and yields integer values when probabilities are powers of two.
          For example, log(1/2) = –1, log(1/4) = –2, and more generally log(1/2n) = –­n.
          (We actually take the negative sum to end up with a positive number.) Random
          128-­bit keys produced using a uniform distribution therefore have the follow-
          ing entropy:




              If you replace 128 with any integer n, the entropy of a uniformly distrib-
          uted n-­bit string will be n bits.
              Entropy is maximized when the distribution is uniform because a uni-
          form distribution maximizes uncertainty: no outcome is more likely than
          the others. Therefore, n-­bit values can’t have more than n bits of entropy.




                                                                                             Randomness   27
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                         By the same token, when the distribution is not uniform, entropy is
                    lower. Consider the coin toss example. The entropy of a fair toss is the
                    following:

                                   − (1 2 ) × log (1 2 ) − (1 2 ) × log (1 =
                                                                           2 ) 1 2 + 1 2 = 1 bit

                        What if one side of the coin has a higher probability of landing face up
                    than the other? Say heads has a probability of 1/4 and tails 3/4. (Remember
                    that the sum of all probabilities should be 1.)
                        The entropy of such a biased toss is this:

                 − ( 3 4 ) × log ( 3 4 ) − (1 4 ) × log (1 4 ) ≈ − ( 3 4 ) × ( −0.415 ) − (1 4 ) × ( −2 ) ≈ 0.81 bii ts

                        The fact that 0.81 is less than the 1-­bit entropy of a fair toss tells us
                    that the more biased the coin, the less uniform the distribution and the
                    lower the entropy. Taking this example further, if heads has a probability
                    of 1/10, the entropy is 0.469; if the probability drops to 1/100, the entropy
                    drops to 0.081.

       NOTE         Entropy can also be viewed as a measure of information. For example, the result of
                    a fair coin toss gives you exactly 1 bit of information—­heads or tails—­and you’re
                    unable to predict the result of the toss in advance. In the case of the unfair coin toss,
                    you know in advance that tails is more probable, so you can predict the outcome. The
                    result of the unfair coin toss gives you the information needed to predict the result
                    with certainty.


     Random and Pseudorandom Number Generators
                    Cryptosystems need randomness to be secure and therefore need a compo-
                    nent from which to get their randomness. The job of this component is to
                    return random bits when requested to do so. To perform this randomness
                    generation, you’ll need two things:
                    •    A source of entropy, provided by random number generators.
                    •    A cryptographic algorithm to produce high-­quality random bits
                         from the source of entropy. This is found in pseudorandom number
                         generators.
                        Using both random and pseudorandom number generators is the key
                    to making cryptography practical and secure. Let’s briefly look at how ran-
                    dom number generators work before exploring pseudorandom number
                    generators in depth.
                        Randomness comes from the environment, which is analog, chaotic,
                    uncertain, and hence unpredictable. Randomness can’t be generated by
                    computer-­based algorithms alone. In cryptography, randomness usually
                    comes from random number generators (RNGs), which are software or hard-
                    ware components that leverage entropy in the analog world to produce
                    unpredictable bits in a digital system. For example, an RNG might directly

28   Chapter 2
  Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

         sample bits from measurements of temperature, acoustic noise, air turbu-
         lence, or electrical static. Unfortunately, such analog entropy sources aren’t
         always available, and their entropy is often difficult to estimate.
             RNGs can also harvest the entropy in a running operating system by
         drawing from attached sensors, I/O devices, network or disk activity, system
         logs, running processes, and user activities such as key presses and mouse
         movement. Such system-­and human-­generated activities can be a good
         source of entropy, but they can be fragile and manipulated by an attacker.
         Also, they’re slow to yield random bits.

NOTE     Quantum random number generators (QRNGs) are a type of RNG that rely on
         the randomness arising from quantum mechanical phenomena, such as radioactive
         decay, photon polarization, or thermal noise. These phenomena, not being character-
         ized by equations that determine the future state from the current state, are random in
         the absolute sense. In practice, however, the raw bits extracted from a QRNG may be
         biased and tend to be slow to produce. Like the previously cited entropy sources, they
         require postprocessing to generate reliable bits at high speed.

             Pseudorandom number generators (PRNGs) address the challenge in gener-
         ating randomness by reliably producing many artificial random bits from
         a few true random bits. For example, an RNG that translates mouse move-
         ments to random bits would stop working if you stop moving the mouse,
         whereas a PRNG always returns pseudorandom bits when requested to
         do so.
             PRNGs rely on RNGs but behave differently: RNGs produce true ran-
         dom bits relatively slowly from analog sources, in a nondeterministic way,
         and with no guarantee of uniform distribution or of high entropy per bit.
         In contrast, PRNGs produce random-­looking bits quickly from digital
         sources, in a deterministic way, uniformly distributed, and with an entropy
         guaranteed to be high enough for cryptographic applications. Essentially,
         PRNGs transform a few unreliable random bits into a long stream of reli-
         able pseudorandom bits suitable for crypto applications, as Figure 2-1
         shows.

                       RNG        100 . . . 01     PRNG       1011001 . . . 10110

         Figure 2-1: RNGs produce few unreliable bits from analog sources, whereas
         PRNGs expand those bits to a long stream of reliable bits.


         How PRNGs Work
         A PRNG receives random bits from an RNG at regular intervals and uses
         them to update the contents of a large memory buffer, called the entropy
         pool. The entropy pool is the PRNG’s source of entropy, just like the physical
         environment is to an RNG. When the PRNG updates the entropy pool, it
         mixes the pool’s bits together to help remove any statistical bias.




                                                                                  Randomness   29
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                       To generate pseudorandom bits, the PRNG runs a deterministic ran-
                  dom bit generator (DRBG) algorithm that expands some bits from the
                  entropy pool into a much longer sequence. As its name suggests, a DRBG
                  is deterministic, not randomized: given one input, you will always get the
                  same output. The PRNG ensures that its DRBG never receives the same
                  input twice so it can generate unique pseudorandom sequences.
                       In the course of its work, the PRNG performs three operations:
                       init() ​  ​Initializes the entropy pool and the internal state of the PRNG
                       refresh(R) ​  ​Updates the entropy pool using some data, R, usually
                       sourced from an RNG
                       next(N) ​  R ​ eturns N pseudorandom bits and updates the entropy pool
                       The init operation resets the PRNG to a fresh state, reinitializes the
                  entropy pool to some default value, and initializes any variables or memory
                  buffers used by the PRNG to carry out the refresh and next operations.
                       The refresh operation is often called reseeding, and its argument R is
                  called a seed. When no RNG is available, seeds may be unique values hard-
                  coded in a system. The refresh operation is typically called by the operating
                  system, whereas next is typically called or requested by applications. The
                  next operation runs the DRBG and modifies the entropy pool to ensure that
                  the next call will yield different pseudorandom bits.

                  Security Concerns
                  Let’s talk briefly about how PRNGs address high-­level security concerns.
                  Specifically, PRNGs should guarantee backtracking resistance and prediction
                  resistance. Backtracking resistance (also called forward secrecy) means that
                  previously generated bits are impossible to recover, whereas prediction
                  resistance (backward secrecy) means that future bits should be impossible to
                  predict.
                        To achieve backtracking resistance, the PRNG should ensure that the
                  transformations performed when updating the state through the refresh
                  and next operations are irreversible. This way, if an attacker compromises
                  the system and obtains the entropy pool’s value, they can’t determine the
                  previous values of the pool or the previously generated bits. To achieve
                  prediction resistance, the PRNG should call refresh regularly with R values
                  that are unknown to an attacker and are difficult to guess, thus preventing
                  an attacker from determining future values of the entropy pool, even if the
                  whole pool is compromised. (If the list of R values were known, you’d need
                  to know the order in which refresh and next calls were made to reconstruct
                  the pool.)

                  The PRNG Fortuna
                  Fortuna is a PRNG construction used in Windows originally designed in
                  2003 by Niels Ferguson and Bruce Schneier. Fortuna superseded Yarrow,
                  a 1998 design by John Kelsey and Bruce Schneier that was for a long time
                  used in the macOS and iOS operating systems and has been replaced by


30   Chapter 2
Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

       Fortuna. I won’t provide the Fortuna specification here or show you how to
       implement it, but I will try to explain how it works. You’ll find a complete
       description of Fortuna in Chapter 9 of Cryptography Engineering by Ferguson,
       Schneier, and Kohno (Wiley, 2010).
           Fortuna’s internal memory includes the following:
       •    Thirty-­t wo entropy pools, P 1, P 2, . . . , P 32, such that Pi is used every 2i
            reseeds.
       •    A key, K, and a counter, C (both 16 bytes). These form the internal state
            of Fortuna’s DRBG.
            In simplest terms, Fortuna works like this:
       •    init() sets K and C to zero and empties the 32 entropy pools Pi , where
            i = 1 . . . 32.
       •    refresh(R) appends the data, R, to one of the entropy pools. The system
            chooses the RNGs used to produce R values, and it should call refresh
            regularly.
       •    next(N) updates K using data from one or more entropy pools, where
            the choice of the entropy pools depends mainly on how many updates
            of K have already been done. The N bits requested are then produced
            by encrypting C using K as a key. If encrypting C is not enough, Fortuna
            encrypts C + 1, then C + 2, and so on, to get enough bits.
            Although Fortuna’s operations look fairly simple, implementing them
       correctly is hard. For one, you need to get all the details of the algorithm
       right—­how entropy pools are chosen, the type of cipher to be used in next,
       how to behave when no entropy is received, and so on. Although the specs
       define most of the details, they don’t include a comprehensive test suite to
       check that an implementation is correct, which makes it difficult to ensure
       that your implementation of Fortuna will behave as expected.
            Even if Fortuna is correctly implemented, security failures may occur
       for reasons other than the use of an incorrect algorithm. For example,
       Fortuna might not notice if the RNGs fail to produce enough random bits,
       and as a result Fortuna will produce lower-­quality pseudorandom bits, or it
       may stop delivering pseudorandom bits altogether.
            Another risk inherent in Fortuna implementations lies in the possibility
       of exposing associated seed files to attackers. The data in Fortuna seed files
       is used to feed entropy to Fortuna through refresh calls when an RNG is not
       immediately available—­for example, immediately after a system reboot and
       before the system’s RNGs have recorded any unpredictable events. However,
       if an identical seed file is used twice, Fortuna will produce the same bit
       sequence twice. Seed files should therefore be erased after use to ensure
       they aren’t reused.
            Finally, if two Fortuna instances are in the same state because they’re
       sharing a seed file (meaning the same data in the entropy pools, includ-
       ing C and K), then the next operation will return the same bits in both
       instances.



                                                                                Randomness   31
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                  Cryptographic vs. Noncryptographic PRNGs
                  There are cryptographic and noncryptographic PRNGs. Non­crypto PRNGs
                  are designed to produce uniform distributions for applications such as scien-
                  tific simulations or video games. However, you should never use noncrypto
                  PRNGs in crypto applications, because they’re insecure; they’re concerned
                  only with the quality of the bits’ probability distribution and not with their
                  predictability. Crypto PRNGs, on the other hand, are unpredictable because
                  they’re also concerned with the strength of the underlying operations used
                  to deliver well-­distributed bits.
                       Unfortunately, most PRNGs exposed by programming languages—­
                  such as libc’s rand and drand48, PHP’s rand and mt_rand, Python’s random mod-
                  ule, and Java’s java.util.Random class—­are noncryptographic. Defaulting to
                  a noncrypto PRNG is a recipe for disaster because it often ends up being
                  used in crypto applications, so be sure to use only crypto PRNGs when gen-
                  erating randomness related to cryptographic or security applications.

                  A Popular Noncrypto PRNG: Mersenne Twister
                  The Mersenne Twister (MT) algorithm is a noncryptographic PRNG used (at
                  the time of this writing) in PHP, Python, R, Ruby, and many other systems.
                  It’s even been used (unfortunately) in blockchain wallet key generators. MT
                  generates uniformly distributed random bits without statistical bias, but it’s
                  predictable: given a few bits produced by MT, one can guess which bits will
                  follow.
                        Let’s look under the hood to see what makes the Mersenne Twister
                  insecure. The MT algorithm is much simpler than that of crypto PRNGs:
                  its internal state is an array, S, consisting of 624 32-­bit words. This array is
                  initially set to S1, S 2, . . . , S 624 and evolves to S 2, . . . , S 625, then S 3, . . . , S 626,
                  and so on, according to this equation:



                        Here, ⊕ denotes the bitwise XOR (^ in the C programming language),
                  ∧ denotes the bitwise AND (& in C), ∨ denotes the bitwise OR (| in C), and
                  A is a function that transforms some 32-­bit word, x, to (x >> 1) if x’s most
                  significant bit is 0, or to (x >> 1) ⊕ 0x9908b0df otherwise.
                        In this equation, bits of S interact with each other only through XORs.
                  The operators ∧ and ∨ never combine 2 bits of S together but instead com-
                  bine bits of S with bits from the constants 0x80000000 and 0x7fffffff. This
                  way, any bit from S 625 can be expressed as an XOR of bits from S 398, S1, and
                  S 2, and any bit from any future state can be expressed as an XOR combi-
                  nation of bits from the initial state S1, . . . , S 624. (When you express, say,
                  S 228 + 624 = S 852 as a function of S 625, S 228, and S 229, you can in turn replace
                  S 625 by its expression in terms of S 398, S1, and S 2.)
                        Because there are exactly 624 × 32 = 19,968 bits in the initial state (or
                  624 32-­bit words), any output bit can be expressed as an equation with at
                  most 19,969 terms (19,968 bits plus one constant bit). That’s about 2.5KB of



32   Chapter 2
  Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

         data. The converse is also true: bits from the initial state can be expressed
         as an XOR of output bits.

         Linearity Insecurity
         We call an XOR combination of bits a linear combination. For example, if
         X, Y, and Z are bits, then the expression X ⊕ Y ⊕ Z is a linear combination,
         whereas (X ∧ Y) ⊕ Z is not because there’s an AND (∧). If you flip a bit of X
         in X ⊕ Y ⊕ Z, then the result changes as well, regardless of Y’s and Z’s val-
         ues. In contrast, if you flip a bit of X in (X ∧ Y) ⊕ Z, the result changes only
         if Y’s bit at the same position is 1. The upshot is that linear combinations
         are predictable because you don’t need to know the value of the bits in
         order to predict how a change in their value will affect the result.
              For comparison, if the MT algorithm were cryptographically strong, its
         equations would be nonlinear and would involve not only single bits but also
         AND ­combinations (products) of bits, such as S1S15S182 or S17S 256S 257S 354S 498S 601.
         Although linear combinations of those bits include at most 624 variables,
         nonlinear combinations allow for up to 2624 variables. It would be impossible
         to solve, let alone write down, the whole of these equations. (Note that 2305, a
         much smaller number, is the estimated information capacity of the observ-
         able universe.)
              The key here is that linear transformations lead to short equations (com-
         parable in size to the number of variables), which are easy to solve, whereas
         nonlinear transformations give rise to equations of exponential size, which
         are practically unsolvable. The game of cryptographers is thus to design
         PRNG algorithms that emulate such complex nonlinear transformations
         using only a small number of simple operations.

NOTE     Linearity is just one of many security criteria. Although necessary, nonlinearity alone
         does not make a PRNG cryptographically secure.

         The Uselessness of Statistical Tests
         Statistical test suites like TestU01, Diehard, or the National Institute of
         Standards and Technology (NIST) test suite are one way to test the qual-
         ity of pseudorandom bits. These tests take a sample of pseudorandom bits
         produced by a PRNG (say, 1MB’s worth), compute some statistics on the
         distribution of certain patterns in the bits, and compare the results with the
         typical results obtained for a uniform distribution. For example, some tests
         count the number of 1 bits versus the number of 0 bits, or the distribution
         of 8-­bit patterns. But statistical tests are largely irrelevant to cryptographic
         security, and it’s possible to design a cryptographically weak PRNG that
         fools any statistical test.
              When you run statistical tests on randomly generated data, you will
         usually see a bunch of statistical indicators as a result. These are typically
         p-­values, a common statistical indicator. These results aren’t always easy
         to interpret because they’re rarely as simple as passed or failed. If your
         first results seem abnormal, don’t worry: they may be the result of some


                                                                                  Randomness   33
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                  accidental deviation, or you may be testing too few samples. To ensure
                  that the results you see are normal, compare them with those obtained for
                  some reliable sample of identical size—for example, one generated with the
                  OpenSSL toolkit using the following command:

                  $ openssl rand <number of bytes> -­out <output file>



     Real-­World PRNGs
                  Let’s turn our attention to implementing PRNGs in the real world. You’ll
                  find crypto PRNGs in the operating systems (OSs) of most platforms, from
                  desktops and laptops to embedded systems such as routers and set-­top
                  boxes, as well as virtual machines, mobile phones, and so on. Most of these
                  PRNGs are software based, but those that are pure hardware are used by
                  applications running on the OS and sometimes by other PRNGs running
                  on top of cryptographic libraries or applications.
                      Next, we’ll look at the most widely deployed PRNGs: for Linux, Android,
                  and many other Unix-­based systems; in Windows; and in recent Intel
                  microprocessors, whose PRNG is hardware based.

                  Random Bits in Linux
                  The device file /dev/urandom is the userland interface to the crypto PRNG
                  in operating systems based on the Linux kernel. You’ll typically use it to
                  generate reliable random bits. Because it’s a device file, you request random
                  bits from /dev/urandom by reading it as a file. For example, the following
                  command uses /dev/urandom to write 10MB of random bits to a file:

                  $ dd if=/dev/urandom of=<output file> bs=1M count=10


                  The Wrong Way to Use /dev/urandom
                  You could write a naive and insecure C program like the one shown in
                  Listing 2-1 to read random bits and hope for the best, but that would be a
                  bad idea.

                  int random_bytes_insecure(void *buf, size_t len)
                  {
                      int fd = open("/dev/urandom", O_RDONLY);
                      read(fd, buf, len);
                      close(fd);
                      return 0;
                  }

                  Listing 2-1: An insecure use of /dev/urandom

                      This code is insecure; it doesn’t even check the return values of open()
                  and read(), which means your expected random buffer could end up filled
                  with zeros or left unchanged.


34   Chapter 2
Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

       A Safer Way to Use /dev/urandom
       Listing 2-2, copied from the LibreSSL library, shows a safer way to use
       /dev/urandom.

       int random_bytes_safer(void *buf, size_t len)
       {
           struct stat st;
           size_t i;
           int fd, cnt, flags;
           int save_errno = errno;

       start:
           flags = O_RDONLY;
       #ifdef O_NOFOLLOW
           flags |= O_NOFOLLOW;
       #endif
       #ifdef O_CLOEXEC
           flags |= O_CLOEXEC;
       #endif
         1 fd = open("/dev/urandom", flags, 0);
           if (fd == -1) {
               if (errno == EINTR)
                   goto start;
               goto nodevrandom;
           }
       #ifndef O_CLOEXEC
           fcntl(fd, F_SETFD, fcntl(fd, F_GETFD) | FD_CLOEXEC);
       #endif

            /* Lightly verify that the device node looks sane. */
            if (fstat(fd, &st) == -1 || !S_ISCHR(st.st_mode)) {
                close(fd);
                goto nodevrandom;
            }
            if (ioctl(fd, RNDGETENTCNT, &cnt) == -1) {
                close(fd);
                goto nodevrandom;
            }
            for (i = 0; i < len; ) {
                size_t wanted = len -­i;
              2 ssize_t ret = read(fd, (char *)buf + i, wanted);

                if (ret == -1) {
                    if (errno == EAGAIN || errno == EINTR)
                        continue;
                    close(fd);
                    goto nodevrandom;
                }
                i += ret;
            }
            close(fd);
            if (gotdata(buf, len) == 0) {
                errno = save_errno;
                return 0; /* Satisfied */
            }
                                                                                Randomness   35
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                  nodevrandom:
                      errno = EIO;
                      return -1;
                  }

                  Listing 2-2: A safe use of /dev/urandom

                       Unlike Listing 2-1, Listing 2-2 makes several sanity checks. Compare,
                  for example, the calls to open() 1 and to read() 2 with those in Listing 2-1:
                  the safer code checks the return values of those functions and upon failure
                  closes the file descriptor and returns –1.

                  Differences Between /dev/urandom and /dev/random, Before 2022
                  The Linux PRNG, defined in drivers/char/random.c in the Linux kernel,
                  underwent major changes in 2022 (since kernel version 5.17).
                       First, the general structure of the PRNG, which is similar in the old
                  and new versions, is based on a collection of entropy from various sources
                  (including system activity, such as keyboard, mouse, and disk accesses),
                  as well as from an entropy pool that can be seen as a large array, which is
                  filled by hashing data collected from the entropy sources. Next, a DRBG
                  is responsible for producing the pseudorandom data streams returned
                  when /dev/random or /dev/urandom is read or when the getrandom() system
                  call is made.
                       Historically, prior to kernel version 5.17, the Linux PRNG behaved as
                  follows: unlike /dev/urandom, the /dev/random interface was blocking; if the
                  kernel estimated that the PRNG had an insufficient level of entropy, then
                  /dev/random would stop returning bytes (“block”) when it was read, until a
                  sufficient level of entropy was estimated by the kernel. This was not a good
                  idea. For one thing, entropy estimators are notoriously unreliable and can
                  be fooled by attackers (which is one reason why Fortuna ditched Yarrow’s
                  entropy estimation). Furthermore, /dev/random ran out of estimated entropy
                  pretty quickly, which could produce a denial-­of-­service condition, slowing
                  applications that were forced to wait for more entropy. The upshot is that
                  in practice, /dev/random was no better than /dev/urandom and created more
                  problems than it solved.

                  Differences Between /dev/urandom and /dev/random, Since 2022
                  In versions of the Linux kernel from 2022 (5.17 onward), several improve-
                  ments have been incorporated. First, the SHA-1 hash function has been
                  replaced by BLAKE2 when creating the contents of the pool. The biggest
                  change is the modification of the relative behavior of /dev/random and
                  /dev/urandom; it has even been proposed to eliminate their differences alto-
                  gether. At the time of writing, on most platforms both interfaces will detect
                  if there isn’t enough entropy, but /dev/urandom will resume producing pseu-
                  dorandom bits if the kernel fails to collect enough entropy, whereas /dev/
                  random will block.



36   Chapter 2
Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

            In addition, the kernel’s entropy estimation logic has been greatly
       improved: instead of considering that entropy decreases when PRNG bits
       are read (a cryptographic nonsense), the kernel just looks for the point
       when enough uncertainty (that is, entropy) has been collected—­for exam-
       ple, at system startup.
            You can read the entropy value of a Linux system in the /proc/sys/kernel/
       random/entropy_avail file. In older versions of the kernel, this value was a
       maximum of 4,096 bits and decreased with the generation of PRNG bits.
       In the new kernels, the value is capped at 256 bits and therefore no longer
       decreases.

       The CryptGenRandom() Function in Windows
       In Windows, the legacy userland interface to the system’s PRNG is the
       CryptGenRandom() function from the Cryptography application program-
       ming interface (API). Recent Windows versions replace the CryptGenRandom()
       function with the BcryptGenRandom() function in the Cryptography API: Next
       Generation (CNG). The Windows PRNG takes entropy from the kernel mode
       driver cng.sys (formerly ksecdd.sys), whose entropy collector is loosely based on
       Fortuna. As is usually the case in Windows, the process is complicated.
           Listing 2-3 shows a typical C++ invocation of CryptGenRandom() with the
       required checks.

       int random_bytes(unsigned char *out, size_t outlen)
       {
           static HCRYPTPROV handle = 0; /* Only freed when the program ends */
           if(!handle) {
               if(!CryptAcquireContext(&handle, 0, 0, PROV_RSA_FULL,
                                       CRYPT_VERIFYCONTEXT | CRYPT_SILENT)) {
                   return -1;
               }
           }
           while(outlen > 0) {
               const DWORD len = outlen > 1048576UL ? 1048576UL : outlen;
               if(!CryptGenRandom(handle, len, out)) {
                   return -2;
               }
               out    += len;
               outlen -­= len;
           }
           return 0;
       }

       Listing 2-3: Using the Windows CryptGenRandom() PRNG interface

            Prior to calling the actual PRNG, you need to declare a cryptographic
       service provider (HCRYPTPROV) and then acquire a cryptographic context with
       CryptAcquireContext(), which increases the likelihood that things will go
       wrong. For instance, the final version of the TrueCrypt encryption software
       was found to call CryptAcquireContext() in a way that could silently fail, lead-
       ing to suboptimal randomness without notifying the user. Fortunately, the


                                                                                Randomness   37
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                  newer and simpler BCryptGenRandom() interface for Windows doesn’t require
                  the code to explicitly open a handle (or at least makes it much easier to use
                  without a handle).

                  A Hardware-­Based PRNG: Intel Secure Key
                  We’ve discussed only software PRNGs so far, so let’s take a look at a hard-
                  ware one. The Intel Digital Random Number Generator, or Intel Secure Key, is a
                  hardware PRNG introduced in 2012 in Intel’s Ivy Bridge microarchitecture.
                  It’s based on NIST’s SP 800-90 guidelines with the Advanced Encryption
                  Standard (AES) in CTR_DRBG mode. Intel’s PRNG is accessed through
                  the RDRAND assembly instruction, which offers an interface independent of
                  the operating system and is in principle faster than software PRNGs.
                       Whereas software PRNGs try to collect entropy from unpredictable
                  sources, Intel Secure Key has a single entropy source that provides a
                  serial stream of entropy data as zeros and ones. In hardware engineering
                  terms, this entropy source is a dual differential jamb latch with feedback—­
                  essentially, a small hardware circuit that jumps between two states (0 or 1)
                  depending on thermal noise fluctuations, at a frequency of 3 GHz. This is
                  usually pretty reliable.
                       The RDRAND assembly instruction takes as an argument a register of 16,
                  32, or 64 bits and then writes a random value. When invoked, RDRAND sets the
                  carry flag to 1 if the data set in the destination register is a valid random
                  value, and to 0 otherwise; be sure to check the CF flag if you write assembly
                  code directly. Note that the C intrinsics available in common compilers
                  don’t check the CF flag but do return its value.

       NOTE       Intel’s PRNG framework provides an assembly instruction other than RDRAND: the
                  RDSEED assembly instruction returns random bits directly from the entropy source,
                  after some conditioning or cryptographic processing. It’s intended to be able to seed
                  other PRNGs.

                       Intel Secure Key is only partially documented, but it’s built on known stan-
                  dards and has been audited by the well-­regarded company Cryptography
                  Research (see its report titled “Analysis of Intel’s Ivy Bridge Digital Random
                  Number Generator”). Nonetheless, there have been some concerns about
                  its security, especially following Edward Snowden’s revelations about cryp-
                  tographic backdoors: PRNGs are indeed the perfect target for sabotage. If
                  you’re concerned but still want to use RDRAND or RDSEED, mix them with other
                  entropy sources. Doing so will prevent effective exploitation of a hypotheti-
                  cal backdoor in Intel Secure Key’s hardware or in the associated microcode
                  in all but the most far-­fetched scenarios.


     How Things Can Go Wrong
                  To conclude, I’ll present a few examples of randomness failures. There are
                  countless examples to choose from, but I’ve chosen four that are simple
                  enough to understand and illustrate different problems.

38   Chapter 2
Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

       Poor Entropy Sources
        In 1996, the SSL implementation of the Netscape browser was computing
        128-­bit PRNG seeds according to the pseudocode shown in Listing 2-4,
        copied from Goldberg and Wagner’s page at https://www.cs.berkeley.edu/­~daw​/​
       ­papers​/­ddj​-­netscape​.html.

       global variable seed;

       RNG_CreateContext()
           (seconds, microseconds) = time of day; /* Time elapsed since 1970 */
           pid = process ID; ppid = parent process ID;
           a = mklcpr(microseconds);
         1 b = mklcpr(pid + seconds + (ppid << 12));
           seed = MD5(a, b); /* Derivation of a 128-­bit value using the hash MD5 */

       mklcpr(x) /* Not cryptographically significant; shown for completeness */
           return ((0xDEECE66D * x + 0x2BBB62DC) >> 1);

       MD5() /* A very good standard mixing function, source omitted */

       Listing 2-4: Pseudocode of the Netscape browser’s generation of 128-­bit PRNG seeds

           The problem here is that the PIDs and microseconds are guessable
       values. Assuming that you can guess the value of seconds, microseconds has
       only 106 possible values and thus an entropy of log(106), or about 20 bits.
       The process ID (PID) and parent process ID (PPID) are 15-­bit values, so
       you’d expect 15 + 15 = 30 additional entropy bits. But looking at how b is
       computed 1 shows that the overlap of 3 bits yields an entropy of about
       15 + 12 = 27 bits, for a total entropy of only 47 bits, whereas a 128-­bit seed
       should have 128 bits of entropy.

       Insufficient Entropy at Boot Time
       In 2012, researchers scanned the internet and harvested public keys from
       TLS certificates and SSH hosts. They found that a handful of systems had
       identical public keys, and in some cases very similar keys (namely, RSA keys
       with shared prime factors)—in short, two numbers, n = pq and n′ = p′q ′, with
       p = p′, whereas normally all ps and qs should be different in distinct modu-
       lus values.
            It turned out that many devices generated their public key early, at first
       boot, before having collected enough entropy, despite using an otherwise-
       decent PRNG (typically /dev/urandom). PRNGs in different systems pro-
       duced identical random bits due to having the same entropy source (for
       example, a hardcoded seed).
            At a high level, the presence of identical keys is due to key-­generation
       schemes like the following, in pseudocode:

       prng.seed(seed)
       p = prng.generate_random_prime()
       q = prng.generate_random_prime()
       n = p*q

                                                                                 Randomness   39
            Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

                       If two systems run this code given an identical seed, they’ll produce the
                  same p, the same q, and therefore the same n.
                       The presence of shared primes in different keys is due to key-­generation
                  schemes where additional entropy is injected during the process, as demon-
                  strated here:

                  prng.seed(seed)
                  p = prng.generate_random_prime()
                  prng.add_entropy()
                  q = prng.generate_random_prime()
                  n = p*q

                       If two systems run this code with the same seed, they’ll produce the
                  same p, but the injection of entropy through prng.add_entropy() will ensure
                  distinct qs.
                       The problem with shared prime factors is that given n = pq and n′ = pq′, it’s
                  trivial to recover the shared p by computing the greatest common divisor (GCD)
                  of n and n′. For details, see the paper “Mining Your Ps and Qs” by Heninger,
                  Durumeric, Wustrow, and Halderman, available at https://factorable.net.

                  Noncryptographic PRNG
                  Earlier we discussed the difference between crypto and non­crypto PRNGs
                  and why the latter should never be used for crypto applications. Alas, many
                  systems overlook that detail, so we’ll look at one such example.
                       The popular MediaWiki application runs on Wikipedia and many other
                  wikis. It uses randomness to generate things like security tokens and tempo-
                  rary passwords, which should be unpredictable. Unfortunately, a now obso-
                  lete version of MediaWiki used a non­crypto PRNG, the Mersenne Twister,
                  to generate these tokens and passwords. Here’s a snippet from the vulner-
                  able MediaWiki source code; look for the function called to get a random
                  bit, and read the comments:

                          /**
                           * Generate a hex-­y looking random token for various uses.
                           * Could be made more cryptographically sure if someone cares.
                           * @return string
                           */
                  function generateToken( $salt = '' ) {
                      $token = dechex(mt_rand()).dechex(mt_rand());
                      return md5( $token . $salt );
                  }

                       Did you notice mt_rand() in the preceding code? Here, mt stands for
                  Mersenne Twister. In 2012, researchers showed how to exploit the predict-
                  ability of Mersenne Twister to predict future tokens and temporary pass-
                  words, given a couple of security tokens. MediaWiki was patched to use a
                  crypto PRNG.




40   Chapter 2
   Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson

          Sampling Bug with Strong Randomness
          The next bug shows how even a strong crypto PRNG with sufficient entropy
          can produce a biased distribution. The chat program Cryptocat was designed
          to offer secure communication. It used a function that attempted to create
          a uniformly distributed string of decimal digits—­namely, numbers in the
          range 0 through 9. However, just taking random bytes modulo 10 doesn’t
          yield a uniform distribution; when taking all numbers between 0 and 255
          and reducing them modulo 10, you don’t get an equal number of values in
          0 to 9.
               Cryptocat did the following to address that problem and obtain a uni-
          form distribution:

          Cryptocat.random = function() {
              var x, o = '';
              while (o.length < 16) {
                  x = state.getBytes(1);
                  if (x[0] <= 250) {
                      o += x[0] % 10;
                  }
              }
              return parseFloat('0.' + o)
          }

               And that was almost perfect. By taking only the numbers up to a mul-
          tiple of 10 and discarding others, you’d expect a uniform distribution of
          the digits 0 through 9. Unfortunately, there was an off-­by-­one error in the
          if condition. I’ll leave the details to you as an exercise. You should find that
          there is a small statistical bias in favor of the index 0 (hint: <= should have
          been <).


Further Reading
          I’ve just scratched the surface of randomness in cryptography. There is
          much more to learn about the theory of randomness, including different
          entropy notions, randomness extractors, and even the power of random-
          ization and derandomization in complexity theory. To learn more about
          PRNGs and their security, read the classic 1998 paper “Cryptanalytic
          Attacks on Pseudorandom Number Generators” by Kelsey, Schneier,
          Wagner, and Hall. Then look at the implementation of PRNGs in your
          favorite applications and try to find their weaknesses. (Search online for
          “random generator bug” to find plenty of examples.)
               We’re not done with randomness, though. We’ll encounter it multiple
          times throughout this book, and you’ll discover the many ways it helps to
          construct secure systems.




                                                                                   Randomness   41
Serious Cryptography, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jean-Philippe Aumasson
