   An Introduction
    to ScratchJr


In recent years there has been a pro­lif­
eration of educational apps and games,
full of flashy graphics and engaging
music, for young children. But many of
these educational apps have been frus­
trating for parents and teachers. The
          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                      A n I n t r o d u ct i o n t o S c r at c h J r




   problem: very few educational apps provide young children with
   opportunities to design, create, and express themselves. That’s
   what motivated us to create ScratchJr.


What Is ScratchJr?
   ScratchJr is an introductory programming language that encour­
   ages creativity and expression, enabling five- to seven-year-old
   children to create their own interactive projects through coding,
   as it is often called these days.
       Using ScratchJr, children can snap together programming
   blocks to make characters move, jump, dance, and sing. They
   can modify how their characters look, design their own back­
   grounds, add their own voices and sounds and even photos of
   themselves—and then use the programming blocks to bring
   their characters to life.
       ScratchJr was inspired by the popular Scratch programming
   language, used by millions of young people (ages eight and up)
   around the world. We redesigned the interface and program­
   ming language to make it developmentally appropriate, as well
   as fun and engaging, for younger children.
       Based on feedback from children, parents, and teachers, we
   went through dozens of prototypes for ScratchJr to make it as
   effective as possible for its purpose. We hope that you find it a
   useful tool for engaging children.


Why Did We Create ScratchJr?
   We believe that every child should be given the opportunity to
   learn how to code. Coding is often seen as difficult or exclusive,
   but we see it as a new type of literacy—a skill that should be




             The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                         2
                © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                      A n I n t r o d u ct i o n t o S c r at c h J r




   accessible for everyone. Coding helps learners to organize their
   thinking and express their ideas, just as writing does.
       As young children code with ScratchJr, they learn how to
   ­create and express themselves with the computer, rather than
    just interact with software created by others. Children learn to
    think sequentially, explore cause and effect, and develop design
    and problem-solving skills. At the same time, they learn to use
    math and language in a meaningful and motivating ­context.
       As children use ScratchJr, they aren’t just learning to code,
    they are coding to learn.


Who Is This Book For?
   This book is for anyone who wants to help children learn to code
   and, more broadly, to think creatively and reason ­systematically.
   It was written particularly for people without coding experience
   or technical expertise, but it can also be helpful for those who
   do have expertise but don’t have experience working with young
   children.
       ScratchJr was designed especially for five- to seven-year-olds
   as a precursor to other programming languages. With a little
   additional support, younger children can enjoy it too, and it can
   also be useful for introducing older children to coding before they
   move on to other programming languages (like Scratch).
       And, of course, for parents or educators without any coding
   knowledge, this book is a good way to learn the basics of coding.
   The best way to learn something new is to teach it to someone
   else. So as you help young children learn to code, you’ll be learn­
   ing too.




             The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                          3
                © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                       A n I n t r o d u ct i o n t o S c r at c h J r




What Do You Need?
   You need to have ScratchJr downloaded on a tablet. ScratchJr
   is available free of charge and runs on iOS and Android devices.
   There are links to download ScratchJr at http://www.scratchjr
   .org/. You can download it from the App Store for an iPad, and it
   runs on second-generation or newer iPads. Download it from the
   Google Play Store if you have a 7-inch Android tablet or larger
   that runs Android 4.2 (Kit Kat) or later.


What’s in This Book?
   This book consists of four chapters. Chapter 1 introduces some
   initial activities to familiarize you with the basic features of
   ScratchJr. The rest of the book assumes you can make your way
   around ScratchJr, so don’t skip the first chapter! The remain­
   ing chapters describe projects that young children can create
   with ScratchJr. Chapter 2 shows playful animations, Chapter 3
   shows how to tell interactive stories, and Chapter 4 shows how
   to create fun games.
       Each chapter is made up of a set of short activities that intro­
   duce new programming blocks and features and a final project
   to integrate all of this knowledge. Each activity reinforces age-
   appropriate math and literacy skills, and includes tips and chal­
   lenges for children who want to explore more.
       Finally, the appendices have resources and references to help
   you make the best use of ScratchJr.




              The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                          4
                 © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                      A n I n t r o d u ct i o n t o S c r at c h J r




How Should You Use This Book?
   We developed the projects as a sequence of activities that will
   incrementally teach different aspects of ScratchJr in a devel­
   opmentally appropriate way. But don’t feel as though you need
   to follow this book step-by-step. Feel free to mix and match and
   adapt our suggested projects to your own and your child’s inter­
   ests. Follow your child’s lead. Every detour is a child-directed
   learning experience. ScratchJr is a tool for self-expression.
   ­Children should feel free to explore ScratchJr’s many buttons
    and features and to use characters and backgrounds that are
    meaningful to them. This is something we hear frequently from
    parents and teachers.
       And please, do let us know how it’s going! Hearing about all
    the different ways you’ve used this book will help us to improve
    ScratchJr further. Send your comments to info@scratchjr.org.
       Have fun!




             The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                          5
                © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
   © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
     Chapter 1
  Getting Started



Welcome to ScratchJr! The projects that
you can make with ScratchJr are lim-
ited only by your imagination. If you can
dream it, you can make it.
    This chapter will teach you the basics
of using ScratchJr, and together we’ll
make a dance party! You’ll learn how
          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                   Ch apte r 1




   to make characters move and speak, how to change the back-
   ground, and how to save your work so you can build on it again
   or share it with your friends. You’ll also learn how to delete
   objects and undo steps.
       After finishing this chapter, you’ll know your way around
   the ScratchJr interface, and you’ll know how to use the program-
   ming blocks to bring your characters to life.


Activity 1: Throw a Dance Party!
   Let’s get the ScratchJr cat to dance with a friend on a stage.




       This chapter will show you how to set up and complete your
   first project.




             The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                         8
                © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                             G ett i n g Start e d




Step 1: Open the App
This is the first screen you’ll see when you open the ScratchJr
app. Tap the Home button on the left.




  When you’re                                                            Take a
   ready to                                                              tour by
  dive in, tap                                                         tapping the
   the Home                                                             Question
     button.                                                              Mark.




Step 2: Make a New Project
The home screen shows all of your saved ScratchJr projects. In
the following picture, you can see two projects that have already
been created. If this is your first project, you’ll see only the plus
sign. Tap the plus sign to make a new project.




           The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                        9
              © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                Ch apte r 1




Step 3: Make the Cat Move!
This is where the magic happens! You can make amazing ani-
mations, silly stories, and great games—all from the ScratchJr
editor. Whatever you make will play in the center of the screen.
We call this area the stage.



                         Stage




                                                                      Palette




                               Programming Area




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                     10
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                            G ett i n g Start e d




   Each new project starts with the ScratchJr cat. To make the
cat move, we can use the motion blocks, which are in the blue
palette of programming blocks. Use your finger to drag one of
the blue arrow blocks to the programming area.

                             Motion Blocks




                                   Drag this block
                                   and then let go.



    Tap the blue block, and the cat moves in the direction of the
arrow!
    You can drag more blocks to the programming area and snap
them together to make a ­sequence of actions, which we call a
script.




    Add some more blue motion blocks to make the cat dance.
Can you guess what movement each block makes? Experiment
to see which blocks make the best dance.
    To run the script and see the cat dance, tap any of the blocks
in the script. Notice that the script runs from the beginning no
matter which block you tap, and each block is highlighted as
it runs.
    Congratulations! You just made your first computer program!
Now let’s turn it into a dance party!




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                      11
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                Ch apte r 1




Step 4: Use the Green Flag
There are other ways to make your project run besides tapping
on scripts. You can also use the Start on Green Flag block to
start your script.
   First, tap the yellow button in the block categories area to
show the triggering blocks. Select the Start on Green Flag
block, drag it to the programming area, and snap it onto the
front of your script.
 Block Categories Area       Triggering Blocks



     1                             2




   Now tap the Green Flag button at the top of the screen.




    The cat will dance just like it did when you tapped on the
script!
    You can see that there are other triggering blocks. You’ll
find out how to use these as you go through the other projects
in this book.




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                     12
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                               G ett i n g Start e d




Step 5: Add a Background
Let’s get the cat to dance on a stage, instead of just a plain white
background. Select a new background by tapping on the button
with the blue sky and green grass at the top of the main screen.
This is called the Change Background button.




   You’ll see loads of backgrounds that you can choose from. For
our dancing cat, let’s choose the theatre. Tap the check mark at
the top to load it into your stage.



                                                                         2




         1




   Congratulations! Your cat is a star!




             The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                         13
                © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                 Ch apte r 1




   The cat is smiling and dancing, but it looks a bit lonely danc-
ing on its own. . . .

Step 6: Add Another Character
Let’s give your cat a friend. Tap the plus sign on the left side of
your screen to add a character.




           The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                      14
              © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                            G ett i n g Start e d




   If you scroll down the page, you’ll see the many characters
you can choose from. Tap the character you want to add, and
then tap the check mark to add it to your project. We’ve chosen
the penguin.



                                                                      2




          1




   Now there are two characters on the stage. To the left of the
stage is the character area, which shows you all the characters
involved in your project.
   The new character will always appear in the middle of the
stage. To move the character, use your finger to drag it wherever
you want on the stage. We’ve dragged each of our characters to a
spotlight.




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                      15
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                 Ch apte r 1




  Character Area




   You might notice that the script you wrote for the cat dis-
appeared after you selected a new character. Don’t worry: the
script is still there! It’s in the cat’s programming area, and now
the screen is showing the programming area for the penguin.
Each character has its own scripts, like actors in a play. To see
the cat’s script, tap the cat in the character area on the left, and
you’ll see that your script is still there. Then select the penguin
again so that you can give it dance moves of its own.

Step 7: Don’t Just Dance, Say Something!
Let’s make the penguin say something before it dances. You can
add speech bubbles for characters using the purple Say block. Tap
the purple button in the block categories area to reveal the looks
blocks.



           The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                      16
              © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                            G ett i n g Start e d




   Drag the Say block to the programming area.

                            Looks Blocks


            1                       2




   Let’s change the text of the Say block from “hi” to “Let’s
dance!” First, tap the word hi to make the keyboard appear.
Use the backspace key to delete hi, and then type Let’s dance!
or whatever you want the penguin to say.




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                      17
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                Ch apte r 1




   Add some blue motion blocks to make the penguin dance, and
then put a Start on Green Flag block at the beginning of the
penguin’s script.




    Now try it out by tapping the Green Flag button (        ) at
the top of the screen.
    You’ll see that the scripts for the cat and the penguin start
running at the same time. When you tap the Green Flag ­button,
it will run every script that begins with a Start on Green Flag
block for every character, all at the same time. This will be
­really useful as you make bigger projects with more characters.

Step 8: Add a Title
You can display a title on the stage by tapping the Add Text
button (     ) at the top of the screen. In the window that pops
up, type Dance Party.
   You can drag the title around the screen and place it any-
where you want.
   You can also use the Change Size (             ) and Change
Color (      ) buttons to change the size and color of the title
you give your project. Play around and see what suits your
stage best. Press Go to try it out on the stage. If you want to
edit the title again, you can tap on the words to bring the text
window back up.




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                     18
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                            G ett i n g Start e d




Step 9: Name Your Project
Now give your project a name so that when
you open ScratchJr again and see your proj-
ects on the home screen, you’ll know which
project is which.
    To name your project, tap the yellow
tab in the top-right ­corner of the screen.
Then delete the current project name
(­Project 1) and type Dance Party. When
you’re ready to return to the main screen,
tap the check mark.




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                      19
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                  Ch apte r 1




                                                                        2
     1
          Enter your
         project name
              here.




   If you want to send your project to someone else who has
ScratchJr, you can do that from this screen too. For more details
on how to share your projects, see the Frequently Asked Ques-
tions on the ScratchJr website (http://www.scratchjr.org/about
.html#faq).
   You’re almost finished, but you have one important step left!

Step 10: Save Your Project
To save your project and go back to the home screen, tap the
Home button (       ) in the top-left corner. Your project will not
be saved until you return to the home screen, so it’s a good idea
to do this a few times while you are working on your project so
that you don’t lose anything.
    To continue working on your project, just tap the small image
of the project on the home screen. This will take you back to the
ScratchJr editor for that project.

            The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                       20
               © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                               G ett i n g Start e d




   Hints
   The ScratchJr characters are all either facing forward or facing
   right when you first add them to your stage. If you want a char-
   acter to face to the left, drag a Move Left block to the program-
   ming area and tap the block.



                                             1


      The character will turn to the left and take a step. You can
   then delete this block and the character will continue to face left.

   Tips for Grown-ups
   ScratchJr makes different sounds when you perform different
   actions on the interface. These sounds can be very useful when
   you first start using ScratchJr. For example, when you have suc-
   cessfully snapped blocks together in a script, you’ll hear a “pop.”
   If you want to turn the sounds off, however, you can just turn
   the volume off on your device.


Don’t Be Afraid to Explore!
   As you explore the various features of ScratchJr, you should feel
   free to experiment, try new features, and test out new blocks.
   You can make your project whatever you want it to be in many
   ways: you could move your party to the beach, put a boat in the
   background, add more characters, or do almost anything else you
   want to do. A good feature of ScratchJr is that if you decide you
   don’t like any of the changes you’ve made, you can easily get rid
   of them.
       We’ll show you some simple ways to do this.




             The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                        21
                © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                Ch apte r 1




Undoing and Redoing
You can undo your most recent actions by tapping the Undo
button at the far end of the blocks palette. If you tap the
Undo button multiple times, you will undo more and more of
your work, one step at a time.
                                                                      Undo



                                                                         Redo

   If you’ve undone several steps, the Redo button will reverse
the most recent Undo.

Deleting Objects
To delete something from ScratchJr, press it with your finger
and hold it for a few seconds (sometimes called a long press)
­until you see a red X appear on the object. Tap the X to delete
 the object.




    You can use this process to delete a character within a proj-
ect or even delete an entire project from the home screen.

Deleting Blocks
To get rid of a block or even a whole script from the program-
ming area, just drag it back up to the blocks palette and let go.
You can have any color palette showing to do this; the palette
doesn’t have to be the same color as the blocks you are deleting.




          The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                     22
             © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                  G ett i n g Start e d




A Guided Tour of the ScratchJr Interface
     Now that you have a good grasp of the basics, you can take a
     look at all the buttons and features. Try a few of the ones we
     skipped earlier. If you feel overwhelmed, don’t worry: the rest of
     the book’s projects will show you how to use everything! It’s okay
     to skip ahead and refer back here when you need to.
         Let’s start with the buttons at the top of the editor.

The Grid button allows you to turn                 With Add Text you can add titles
  the coordinate grid on and off.                     and labels to your projects.

                                                              Reset Characters moves
 The Home button exits                                      all the characters back to
to the home screen and                                        their starting positions
   saves your project.                                             on the stage.




     Presentation Mode expands the                           Tapping the Green Flag
    stage to the full screen. This is                          runs all the scripts
   great for showing off your work.                             that begin with a
                                                           Start on Green Flag block.

          Change Background lets you choose
           a new background for the stage.




                                                           Tapping the Stop button
                                                            stops the scripts that
                                                            are currently running.




                The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                           23
                   © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                      Ch apte r 1




In the character area,
you can select among
the characters in your
  project to give them
scripts or tap the plus
   sign to add a new
    character. Tap the
   name to rename a                            Using Project Information, you can
 character, or tap the                          change the title of your project
 paintbrush to edit its                        and share the project with friends.
    image. To delete a
  character, press and              The pages area allows you to select
  hold it until you see               among the pages in your project.
   the red X; then tap            Check out “Turn the Page!” on page 58
          the X.                     to see how to use the pages area.




                                    The stage is where
                                  the action takes place.




The block categories area is          The blocks palette displays blocks
where you select a category             you can add to your project.
  of programming blocks:
 triggering, motion, looks,
  sound, control, or end.




                The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                           24
                   © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
                                  G ett i n g Start e d




 The active character
   shows you which                      If you make a mistake,              Tap Redo to
   character you’re                       tap Undo to reverse               reverse the
  giving programs to!                       the last action.                last Undo.




                                                                    Drag a block into
                                                                  the programming area
                                                                     and then tap it
                                                                   to see what it does.

      The programming area is where you connect
         programming blocks to create scripts.




What’s Next?
     You now have a good working knowledge of the ScratchJr inter-
     face. Move on to the next chapter to learn about new program-
     ming blocks and to explore new types of projects.




                The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to Code
                                           25
                   © 2015 Marina Umaschi Bers and Mitchel Resnick
