    DESIGNING YOUR NETWORK
                                 5
            It’s quite possible to construct a computer
          network “on the fly,” stringing Ethernet
        cables from a central hub or switch to indi-
    vidual computers and other devices as you need
them. But it’s almost always better to spend some time
planning your network before you start to install it.
It’s a lot easier to make changes to your design on paper rather than making
adds, moves, and changes in physical space. This chapter offers advice and
instructions for preparing a network plan.
     I’m assuming in this chapter that you have chosen not to use either power
line or video cable as your primary network distribution medium. Both of
those methods can be practical in some situations, but a traditional Ethernet
system, possibly with a supplementary Wi-Fi base station, is usually a better
choice for a small business or household network, because the equipment is
widely available, it’s often inexpensive, and it’s easy to install and maintain.
     To begin your network plan, start with a floor plan of the house,
apartment, or workspace where you want to install your network. The plan
doesn’t have to be exactly to scale, but it should be big enough to add notes

                       Network Know-How
                     (C) 2009 by John Ross
                    within each room or cubicle, and it should show the relative positions of
                    each room. Figure 5-1 shows a typical floor plan for a small one-story house.
                    If it’s convenient, use a copier or scanner to make several copies of the
                    floor plan.




                                                        BEDROOM/STUDY

                             LIVING ROOM




                                                                BATH




                            KITCHEN                          BEDROOM




                              LAUNDRY        TO
                                           CELLAR

                    Figure 5-1: Use a floor plan to identify locations for network
                    connection points.


     Identifying Current and Future Nodes
                    The next step is to decide where you will want network connections. Use
                    different colors to note the locations of each of the following items:

                         Electrical outlets Network wiring and outlets should be at least 12 inches
                         away from AC wiring, so it will be helpful to identify all of the AC outlets
                         in each room. In addition, you will want access to AC power for your
                         computer, router, modem, and other network hardware.
                         Your home entertainment systems Home theater equipment, stereo
                         systems, televisions, and game consoles can all exchange data through
                         your home network, so network outlets should be within close range.
                         Telephone wall outlets and connection boxes If you plan to use a DSL
                         or dial-up connection to the Internet, your network will use telephone
                         outlets to connect.
                         Cable TV or other video outlets If you get your Internet service from
                         your cable TV provider, you will connect a modem to a cable outlet.
                         Even if you don’t use cable Internet service, you might want to use com-
                         bined wall plates for video and data outlets.

48   C ha pt er 5                               Network Know-How
                                              (C) 2009 by John Ross
    Furniture placed next to a wall You won’t want to plan a network outlet
    socket in a place that forces you to move a bookcase or a sofa to get to it.
    On the other hand, if there’s a table against the wall, you could probably
    crawl underneath easily to plug in a cable in a place where it won’t call
    attention to itself.
    Closets, stairways, and other hiding places If your home or workplace
    includes spaces on more than one floor of the building, be sure to note
    the locations of closets, stairways, and other places where it will be rela-
    tively easy to run hidden cables through ceilings or floors. As with the
    other wiring in your home or workplace, your goal will be to hide all
    your network cables inside walls, under floors, and in other invisible
    locations.

     If you’re adding the network in an existing home or office, all of these
elements are probably in place already. Before you start to add new network
wiring and connection points, you must understand how they will relate to
the other things in each room. If you’re planning a network as part of a
major remodeling or new construction, plan to coordinate your efforts
with the contractors or outside installers who will provide electrical wiring,
telephones, cable or satellite TV, and wiring for a home theater or home
entertainment system.
     With all this information in one place, it’s easy to decide where you will
want to install network connection points. Use yet another color of pencil to
mark an unobstructed place for the network outlet on the wall nearest to
each computer and every other device you plan to connect to the network.
     Each outlet should be at least a foot from the closest electrical outlet,
both because AC wiring can generate interference that affects data signals,
and because it’s often required by the local electric code to prevent shorting
between AC and data cables.
     If your telephone or cable TV outlets
are mounted on wall plates (rather than
in small boxes attached to the baseboard),
consider replacing the existing wall plate
with a new one that combines two or three
outlets of different types on a single wall
plate, as shown in Figure 5-2.
     When you design your network,
you should also plan for the future. You
probably don’t need them today, but
within a few years, it’s quite possible that
you will want to connect your household
appliances, a bedside radio, and other
devices to your LAN and the Internet.
And if you plan to eventually add one or         Figure 5-2: This wall plate
more online cameras or home automation combines TV and data network
devices (such as lighting or climate controls) outlets.
to the network, it’s a good idea to mark
their tentative locations.

                       Network Know-How                  De si gn i ng Y our Ne tw ork   49
                     (C) 2009 by John Ross
                        Remember, it doesn’t cost anything to mark a location for an outlet on
                    your floor plan. You don’t have to install every outlet right away, but it’s
                    helpful to know where they’re likely to be when you plan your cable runs.
                    You can always change the exact locations before you actually pull cable
                    through the walls.

           NOTE     Planning for a lot of extra network connection points might seem unnecessary right
                    now, but that will almost certainly change. If you plan for more network connection
                    points than you think you need today, you might have enough for the next ten years.
                    Consider this: If you live in an old house with the original electrical wiring, you
                    probably know that one or two AC outlets in each room was considered more than
                    enough back in 1925; more would have been extravagant. Today, you should have
                    several electrical outlet plates on every wall. In the future, household data networks will
                    be as common as electricity and telephones.
                          In your home, consider placing at least one network outlet in each major
                    room—don’t worry about hallways and other odd spaces. In the kitchen,
                    place one outlet close to a counter, and plan to place another on the wall
                    next to the refrigerator and range. You might also want an outlet in the
                    laundry room, not far from the washer and dryer—you probably won’t want
                    to connect your appliances to the network right now, but remote control and
                    monitoring through your home network is a real possibility in the future. In
                    each bedroom, plan for an outlet near a desk or table where the room’s
                    occupant uses a computer or video game console, and (if it’s not close to the
                    first outlet) another outlet for a bedside Internet radio or a laptop computer.
                          In an office, plan for at least one network connection point next to every
                    desk and every other location where you expect to place a computer or other
                    network device, such as a printer.
                          If you expect to use both Ethernet and Wi-Fi connections to your network,
                    note the locations for one or more Wi-Fi access point on your floor plan.
                          All of your network wiring should use CAT5e or CAT6 data cable; less
                    expensive CAT5 (no “e”) cable can’t handle the higher-speed network data
                    that you’re likely to need in the future.

     The Control Center
                    The network control center is the location of the switch, router, modem, and
                    other equipment at the core of the network. All of the wiring that connects
                    each outlet to the network converges at the control center. Common locations
                    for a network control center (sometimes known as a wiring closet ) include
                    closets, utility rooms, and garages or basements. For a very small network
                    (no more than five nodes), you could also consider placing the modem and
                    router on a table next to one of your computers, but that might limit your
                    opportunities for easy expansion of the network in the future.




50   C ha pt er 5                             Network Know-How
                                            (C) 2009 by John Ross
    If you plan to distribute audio, video, telephone, or home automation
wiring around the house along with computer network data, your control
center should have enough space for all of the necessary equipment required
by all those services. It will be easier to pull two or more types of cables at the
same time than to install each type separately.
    A network control center can have several possible forms: It could be a
simple plywood panel attached to the wall, or it might be a pre-wired modular
cabinet mounted on a wall or between the wall studs. Or if you have the floor
space, it might be in one or more freestanding equipment racks.
    The control center’s location should have the following characteristics:

    It should be easily accessible. Don’t choose a location that forces you to
    climb over bicycles and storage boxes or push clothes on hangers aside
    to reach it.
    It should have enough light to allow you to see what you’re doing at any
    time of day or night.
    It should be in a place that remains dry and has a stable temperature.
    It should be close to at least one electrical outlet.
    It should be relatively central, in order to reduce the length of connect-
    ing cables.
    It should be at or slightly below eye level, so you can work comfortably.
    It should have enough space to allow for additional wiring and equip-
    ment in the future.
    It should not be adjacent to the fuse box, circuit breaker box, or other
    electrical panel. AC power wiring must be kept separate from network,
    telephone, and video cables to prevent interference and to comply with
    the National Electric Code.

    After you choose a place for the control center, note its location on your
floor plan.

Home Run Wiring
When you have identified the locations of your network connection points
and found a place for the control center, you can plan the routes for your
network cables. The preferred method for network wiring is called home run
wiring because each cable runs “home” to a central hub or switch. The alter-
native, which is more practical for telephone and video wiring than for data
networks, is point-to-point wiring that uses long cable runs that connect to
each outlet through a splitter, as shown in Figure 5-3.




                        Network Know-How                    De si gn i ng Y our Ne tw ork   51
                      (C) 2009 by John Ross
                                                                                                    Telephone
                                                                                                   service entry


                                                           Telephone           Telephone



 Desktop                                    Desktop
computer                                   computer

                            Hub

                                                           Telephone           Telephone

 Desktop                                    Laptop
computer                                   computer




                                                           Telephone           Telephone
Tower PC                                   Tower PC

Figure 5-3: Home run wiring (left) is best for data networks; telephones and video can use either home run
wiring or point-to-point networks (right).


                         If you haven’t already done so, this is a good time to look around the
                    rooms where you plan to install network outlets, and the spaces directly
                    above and below each room. If you have access to an unfinished basement
                    or attic, you can run cables through the rafters and joists; but if you have to
                    run cables through finished walls and ceilings, you will probably have to hide
                    cables inside walls and behind baseboards and patch some holes after the
                    wires are in place. Either way, look for the best routes for cables from each
                    network outlet to the control center. Use a pencil to mark the routes on your
                    floor plan.
                         There are two ways to attach a network outlet to a wall. For a finished
                    appearance, use a wall plate similar to the ones used for electrical outlets,
                    like the one shown in Figure 5-2. If the outlet will be hidden behind furniture
                    or in some other place where it won’t be visible, you can use a small terminal
                    block mounted on a baseboard like the one in Figure 5-4.




                    Figure 5-4: A data terminal block can mount
                    directly to a baseboard.




52   C ha pt er 5                            Network Know-How
                                           (C) 2009 by John Ross
Trunks and Branches: Using Secondary Switches
There’s an alternative to a pure home run wiring design for small networks
that can make it possible to expand the network without having to run new
cables all the way back to the control center. This approach, which vaguely
resembles the trunks and branches of a tree or the tributaries of a river,
uses data switches to connect additional computers and other devices to
the network through a single outlet, as shown in Figure 5-5. Connecting
through a switch can be particularly handy when you want to use two or
more devices (such as a computer and a game console or a printer server, or
two or more computers) in the same room.



   Desktop
  computer

                  Switch
                                           Tower PC


Printer server




                                         Switch/Router      Desktop
                                                           computer




 Tower PC

                  Switch


   Laptop
  computer

Figure 5-5: An Ethernet switch can extend a network to connect two or
more devices to the network hub through a single cable.

     A secondary switch can also be useful when you want to place network
connection points in adjacent rooms that are difficult to reach from the
control center. For example, if you have two second-floor bedrooms that
share a wall, you could run a single cable to a switch and connect the switch
to computers in both rooms.
     Many Wi-Fi access points are combined with switches that allow you to
connect one or more devices to the network through wired Ethernet outlets.
If you locate your access point in a room where you also use a desktop com-
puter or other network device, a combination unit is often an excellent
choice: Place the access point next to the computer and use an Ethernet
cable to connect it to the switch.




                             Network Know-How                  De si gn i ng Y our Ne tw ork   53
                           (C) 2009 by John Ross
     What About Wi-Fi?
                    Connecting computers and other network devices through a Wi-Fi network
                    is often an easy alternative to a wired Ethernet system. A single access point is
                    often enough for sending and receiving data to and from computers in many
                    rooms.
                         A Wi-Fi network can provide Internet access and LAN services, but it has
                    several disadvantages when compared with a wired network:

                        Wi-Fi networks are usually slower than wired Ethernet unless all the
                        nodes in the network are compatible with the latest 802.11n standards.
                        Wi-Fi networks are less secure than wired networks. Unless you protect
                        your network with a secure encryption method such as WPA, a dedicated
                        intruder can connect to the Internet through your network without your
                        permission and can also steal information from the other computers on
                        the same network.
                        Interference between your Wi-Fi network and your neighbors’ networks
                        and other wireless devices can reduce your network’s data transfer
                        speed.

                         In spite of those limitations, a Wi-Fi network is often an acceptable
                    choice if you don’t want to cut holes through your walls or spend time
                    crawling through your attic or basement. And even if you install a wired
                    network through part of your building, Wi-Fi could be the best way to reach
                    one or two isolated locations such as a top-floor bedroom or a detached
                    garage.
                         For many families and small businesses, the best approach is to install
                    both wired and wireless in the same network. This will allow you and your
                    users to connect your desktop computers, printer, music server, and other
                    devices that never physically move through wired Ethernet, and use Wi-Fi for
                    laptop computers, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) telephones, smart-
                    phones, and other portable devices.
                         If you decide to include one or more Wi-Fi access points in your network,
                    mark their tentative locations on your floor plan. In most cases, a single
                    access point can exchange data with computers and other devices within
                    about 300 feet (100 meters), so the exact location is not critical. The best
                    location is often either in the network control center, or on the floor or a
                    table next to a computer in a fixed location. For detailed information about
                    installing Wi-Fi access points and connecting Wi-Fi devices to your home or
                    office network, see Chapter 8.
                         With your network floor plan more or less complete, you’re ready to
                    install the control center and string Ethernet cables to each room. The next
                    chapter will tell you how to do that job.




54   C ha pt er 5                          Network Know-How
                                         (C) 2009 by John Ross
