                              4
                Recruiting the Best

      My job can be so exciting. I get to work with some of the
      brightest minds and most accomplished luminaries in tech-
      nology, politics, and business. I am consistently humbled
                                                 1
      and feel lucky for the opportunities I get.
      —Christopher Sacca, former Head of Special Initiatives,
      Google, Inc.


Few companies have expressed so strongly and
repeatedly their desire to recruit only the best
people. Google’s recruitment web pages abound
with mantras like “Google seeks to hire only the
best.” Although reports are that Google has had
to relax its hiring policies a bit over the years with
                        The Google Way
                   (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
its dramatic increase in number of employees, headhunters who
have worked with Google make it clear that you have little chance
of being hired without a doctorate or at least a master’s degree from
a top school.
     This elitism, the object of ongoing jokes, is not exclusive to
Google; the same holds true at Amazon.com and Microsoft. For
example, in a 1993 interview, Bill Gates, then CEO of Microsoft,
made these remarks, which the owners of Google could repeat
verbatim today:

         The key for us, number one, has always been hiring very
         smart people. There is no way of getting around, that in
         terms of I.Q., you’ve got to be very elitist in picking the
         people who deserve to write software. Ninety-five percent
         of the people shouldn’t write complex software. And using
         small teams helps a lot. You’ve got to give great tools to
         those small teams. So, pick good people, use small teams,
         give them excellent tools, vast compilation, debugging,
         lots of machines, profiling technology, so that they are very
         productive in terms of what they are doing. Make it very
         clear what they can do to change the spec. Make them feel
                                                  2
         like they are very much in control of it.

Why the Very Best?
This elitist attitude needs to be considered within the singular context
of the technology industry and its fast-growing companies.
    At Google, as in all booming firms, a position’s scope expands
rapidly: An employee may be promoted several times during the
years following the start of his or her initial employment. In these
circumstances, hiring overqualified people is better. And that means
choosing the best.
    But that’s not the only motive for choosing the best people.
Academic qualifications reveal a candidate’s psychological profile.
    When times are good, tech companies besiege universities try-
ing to hire away their students. Those who remain in school to do
graduate work are not only more intelligent and better trained than
average—which are already plus points—but also more impassioned
and motivated. Immediate money is not their main goal.



54   Chapter 4                     The Google Way
                              (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
     These candidates have already shown that they prefer learning to
paid employment. The fact that they stayed in school long enough to
earn a graduate degree means they already turned down numerous
offers to earn fast money as developers—so, in these cases, staying
in school long enough to get an advanced degree shows strength of
character. Recruiting people with graduate degrees is a way to hire
those who are highly motivated and value the quality of their work
above their immediate personal interests. In an industry with very
high turnover, where fortunes can be made quickly, this factor is
important.
     Equally important, new hires with graduate degrees are more
rigorous in their habits. There’s a joke about how doctoral gradu-
ates of the École Polytechnique, France’s most elite school, put their
everyday life into equations. What’s certain about recruiting people
with PhDs is that they’ve learned to rely on precise observation, to
have confidence in math, to trust rational thought over intuition
wherever possible, and to value factual analysis over improvisation.
Google looks for these qualities because its co-founders put more
confidence in mathematics and rationality than in other qualities.
     Finally, the experience of graduate-level research, which is gener-
ally done solo, teaches these job candidates to operate autonomously.
Each graduate student has had to choose a thesis topic, which
familiarized them with what might be called controlled innovation.
A thesis topic, however original it might be, would have no chance
of being accepted if it didn’t fall within a certain scope.
     So behind this oft-criticized elitism is a realistic motive: The
very best employees have a special psychological profile that benefits
high tech companies. What would be truly arrogant is the leaders
believing that because they are so brilliant themselves they don’t need
intelligent people around to help develop their company.

A Recruitment Factory
Hiring the best people is usually very expensive. Fortunately for
Google, the IT collapse that began in 2000 dumped thousands of
trained IT specialists, in all disciplines and at all levels, back into
the job market. In 2001, Motorola alone laid off one-quarter of


                          The Google Way          Recruiting the Best   55
                     (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
its 150,000 employees. And the search engines weren’t doing any
better. In January 2001, then-leader AltaVista laid off 250 people,
one-fourth of its staff, and canceled its plans to go public. Yahoo!,
the other leader in the sector, also suffered large cutbacks. Sun
Microsystems, General Electric, and Siemens laid off thousands
more, and the list goes on.
     Of course, most of those unemployed people didn’t go to work
for Google, but some of the best ones did. Google was hiring at
that time and could recruit from a large applicant pool. Because of
the economic situation, Google was able to hire excellent engineers
at low starting salaries, with partial compensation in stock options.
     As we all know, the economy recovered, and Google’s recruitment
efforts continued to ramp up aggressively. Rather than settle for the
conventional recruiting methods used by most human resources
departments (résumé analysis, psychometric tests, and interviews),
Google chose a different path—yet again.
     The company’s reputation, coupled with competitive salary
offers, would certainly have enabled it to recruit all the employees it
needed. Google’s management did something different: They built
a veritable recruitment machine, massive to the point of being far
disproportionate to the number of employees. In late 2005, Dr.
John Sullivan, a human resources expert, reported that 350 people
at Google were dedicated to recruitment. With 5,000 employees at
the time, this meant that 1 in 14 Google employees was working
in recruitment. That’s an extremely high ratio, considering that in
traditional companies the ratio is 1 recruitment employee per 100
employees. Cisco, another company that is extremely particular
about the quality of its new hires, had one recruiter for every 68
employees in 2005.3
     Of course, these figures are not entirely comparable; not all
of Google’s in-house recruiters were working full time, and other
companies relied more on outside agencies for recruitment. Still, the
number of people involved in recruiting was huge, and this most
likely continues to be the case.




56   Chapter 4                  The Google Way
                           (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
     The human resources department at Google is mostly made up
of temporary staffers. The Google recruitment machine is a factory,
but a flexible one whose workers are called in as the need arises.
     This paradigm is something new in recruiting. In most companies,
the size of the recruitment staff remains pretty constant. Procedures
adjust to meet workload: Recruitment becomes more complex when
fewer open positions exist, and the process is simplified when more
openings are available. As a result, the quality of those hired tends
to decline as the number of openings (and perhaps the company’s
desperation) increases. Conversely, the fewer people the company
needs to recruit, the more interviews per candidate and the more
thorough the process.
     Google’s recruitment figures show how much importance the
company places on a function that most organizations neglect or
deal with in a haphazard way. And for good reason: In a fast-growing
company that hires a lot of people, the quality of the workforce is
at stake and can very quickly deteriorate.
     The mechanism is simple. Allow average employees to recruit
coworkers, and they will likely choose those who won’t outshine
them. This leads to a bureaucratic organization clogged with people
who lack the authority to make the slightest decisions without
seeking the approval of those above them. This phenomenon is an
all-too-common one that has even given rise to a proverb in Silicon
Valley, pointed out repeatedly by Ram Shriram,* one of Google’s first
investors and now a member of the board of directors: “Hire only
A people, and they’ll hire other A people. If you hire a B person,
they’ll hire C or D people.” Forgetting this rule leads to sloppiness
in very fast-growing companies. And Google has been particularly
fast growing: At the end of 2003, Google had 1,628 employees, a
number that grew to 10,674 by the end of 2006. That increase of
over 9,000 employees represents a more than five-fold increase in
only three years. And, as of June 2008, Google had 19,604 full-time




* Before starting his own venture capital firm, Shriram was one of the original team at Netscape, held
an executive position at Amazon.com, and founded several startup companies.


                                   The Google Way                    Recruiting the Best          57
                              (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
employees—nearly double the number of employees that it had at the
end of 2006. As Peter Norvig, Director of Google Research, explains:

         But how do you maintain the skill level while roughly
         doubling in size each year? We rely on the Lake Wobegon
         Strategy, which says only hire candidates who are above the
         mean of your current employees. An alternative strategy (popu-
         lar in the dot-com boom period) is to justify a hire by say-
         ing “this candidate is clearly better than at least one of our
                               4
         current employees.”

Evaluating Technical Expertise
On the surface, Google’s recruitment process looks similar to those
of other companies. Like Microsoft and most large technology firms,
Google gives candidates a more or less traditional series of tests.
    Those applying for a technical position take the Google Labs
Aptitude Test (GLAT), which is distinguished not only by its difficulty
(with some fairly complex statistical and mathematical questions)
but also by its originality and humor. For example, here’s a sample
question taken from an actual GLAT:

         On your first day at Google, you discover that your cubicle
         mate wrote the textbook you used as a primary resource in
         your first year of graduate school. Do you:

         A) Fawn obsequiously and ask if you can have an autograph.

         B) Sit perfectly still and use only soft keystrokes to avoid
         disturbing her concentration.

         C) Leave her daily offerings of granola and English toffee
         from the food bins.

         D) Quote your favorite formula from the textbook and
         explain how it’s now your mantra.

         E) Show her how example 17b could have been solved
         with 34 fewer lines of code.5

   Once the tests are passed, interviews follow. Nothing about the
process is casual.



58   Chapter 4                     The Google Way
                              (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
     Only in the details does the originality of this process become
apparent, however. The first difference is in its organization. At other
companies, recruiters generally use only a small number of tools:
specialized employment agencies, print ads, job fairs, contacts with
schools and professors, and headhunters whose main expertise is in
building networks of contacts.
     Google uses those tools, too, but it also relies on its academic
culture and its experience in the field of research (both in terms of
database searching and research within a university environment).
Its Summer of Code, a program that offers student developers sti-
pends to write code for various open source projects, allows human
resources to identify candidates capable of resolving complex prob-
lems. Google also sponsors contests that attract the most brilliant
minds in the field. And Google uses its own search tools to identify
people who are interested in its job openings.
     Another hallmark of Google’s recruitment strategy is recruiter
specialization. The recruitment process is managed and organized
along particular roles. Some recruiters specialize only in first jobs,
others in technical people or managers, and still others speak only to
candidates for overseas employment. Even at the largest companies,
finding such specialization in the field of human resources would
be rare.
     The result is that each recruiter sees only a very narrow sector
of candidates, so he or she can evaluate them closely to select those
who will be asked to take the psychometric tests and then, if they
pass the tests, be called in for interviews.
     The most original part of recruitment at Google is the actual selec-
tion process. During this process, Google brings in future coworkers
for multiple, lengthy interviews—as many as eight interviews per
potential new hire. (This information comes from candidates who
weren’t hired, because those who get jobs are bound by a lengthy
confidentiality agreement.)
     By all accounts, the process is similar to university seminars where
a candidate is examined by peer experts who ask him or her technical
questions. They don’t ask about his or her personality or ability to get
along in a group; they want to know about the candidate’s capabili-
ties. The questions are technical, challenging, and very close to the

                          The Google Way          Recruiting the Best   59
                     (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
topic at hand. The interview is a strict evaluation of the candidate’s
technical competence and his or her ability to comprehend, address,
and resolve the company’s technological challenges.
    And when the peers asking the questions don’t have the know-
how to evaluate the answers (as must happen often), they can at least
pose questions that will help form a clearer opinion. Greg Linden,
one of the creators of Amazon.com, explains it this way:

            . . . exploring someone’s knowledge doesn’t necessarily
            require knowledge of it yourself. You can just keep asking
            questions, diving deeper and deeper. If they really under-
            stand the problem, they should be able to explain it to
            others, to teach people about the problem. Eventually, you
            should get to a point where they say “I don’t know” to a
            question. That’s a great sign. Knowing what you know isn’t
            as important as knowing what you don’t know. It is a sign
            of real understanding when someone can openly discuss
            where their knowledge ends.6

    During these discussions, the questions tackled are real ones
that arise within the company. One famous example is a question
from Amin Saberi’s interview; Saberi was a student in the final year
of the IT doctorate program at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
    In one interview, Monika Henzinger, then Director of Research,
asked if he had any ideas about how to improve the ad rankings on
Google’s pages. The question was minor, but back at the university,
the young researcher mentioned it to his thesis advisor, who recom-
mended exploring it. After some study, they decided that it would
work better to include the daily budget of the advertiser within the
ranking algorithm. Saberi and his colleagues wrote the algorithm
and filed a patent.7
    This sort of question is a long way from traditional evaluation
methods used in small firms, which often base their methods on
intuition and empathy.* But Google’s process is just as far from the



* Interviews of this sort can become pretty intense. A former Apple employee related how Steve Jobs
upset a candidate whom he found a bit uptight by asking if he was still a virgin. Needless to say, the
candidate concluded he wasn’t the right guy for the job. (Andy Hertzfeld, “Gobble, Gobble, Gobble,”
http://www.folklore.org/ )


60    Chapter 4                             The Google Way
                                       (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
formal evaluations used by large companies, which attempt to evalu-
ate a prospective employee’s personality as well as his or her ability
to fit into the professional environment. At Google, a candidate
must convince his or her future peers that he or she can solve the
problems encountered in the everyday work environment. That is
all that counts.
     If, on the surface, Google’s recruitment procedures resemble
those of other major companies, it becomes obvious, when look-
ing at the details, that their methods are actually the opposite of
traditional ones:

t Recruitment is considered a major function, which is rarely
   the case.
t Human resource staffing is flexible so it can quickly be adapted
    to meet current need.
t Degrees and academic qualifications are used to evaluate per-
    sonal qualities such as chosen career path, rigor in reasoning,
    and autonomy. Normally, degrees are used only to evaluate
    technical expertise.
t Interviews are used to examine technical qualifications: Candi-
   dates are asked questions that apply to the work environment.

    These ideas contribute to Google’s success. Can they be applied
anywhere? I’m not so sure. Google’s hiring process has one main
shortcoming: It is very, very long. So long that Google’s specialists
decided to limit the number of interviews candidates went through.
They also asked staff members who interview candidates to submit
their assessment within a week.8 And if Google’s process is too long
for Google, it’s definitely too long for companies that don’t have its
magnetic pull. In most cases, candidates won’t wait several months
before receiving an answer.




                          The Google Way          Recruiting the Best   61
                     (C) 2009 by Bernard Girard
