                   INTO THE REAL WORLD
                                       3
                    The previous chapter demonstrated the
                    configuration for basic packet filtering on a
                   single machine. In this chapter, we’ll build
                 on that basic setup but move into more con-
             ventional territory: the packet-filtering gateway.
       Although most of the items in this chapter are potentially useful in a
       single-machine setup, our main focus is to set up a gateway that forwards
       a selection of network traffic and handles common network services for a
       basic local network.


A Simple Gateway
       We’ll start with building what you probably associate with the term firewall:
       a machine that acts as a gateway for at least one other machine. In addition
       to forwarding packets between its various networks, this machine’s mission
       will be to improve the signal-to-noise ratio in the network traffic it handles.
       That’s where our PF configuration comes in.
                     But before diving into the practical configuration details, we need to
                 dip into some theory and flesh out some concepts. Bear with me; this will
                 end up saving you some headaches I’ve seen on mailing lists, newsgroups,
                 and forums all too often.

                 Keep It Simple: Avoid the Pitfalls of in, out, and on
                 In the single-machine setup, life is relatively simple. Traffic you create
                 should either pass out to the rest of the world or be blocked by your filter-
                 ing rules, and you get to decide what you want to let in from elsewhere.
                       When you set up a gateway, your perspective changes. You go from the
                 “It’s me versus the network out there” mindset to “I’m the one who decides
                 what to pass to or from all the networks I’m connected to.” The machine
                 has several, or at least two, network interfaces, each connected to a separate
                 network, and its primary function (or at least the one we’re interested in
                 here) is to forward network traffic between networks. Conceptually, the net-
                 work would look something like Figure 3-1.




                                          $ext_if        $int_if



                    The Internet
                                       bge0                     bge1

                                                                       Switch
                                              Our gateway,
                                              the PF firewall


                                                                                Clients

                 Figure 3-1: A network with a single gateway

                      In Figure 3-1 we introduce a convention that we will be using for the
                 rest of the book: We use macros with logical names to refer to the inter-
                 faces, and later use those names in the rulesets rather than the physical
                 interface names. Here we label our Internet-facing interface bge0 as $ext_if,
                 while internal-facing interface bge1 gets the $int_if label. More on that later,
                 I promise.
                      It’s very reasonable to think that if you want traffic to pass from the
                 network connected to bge1 to hosts on the network connected to bge0, you’ll
                 need a rule like the following:

                 pass in proto tcp on bge1 from bge1:network to bge0:network \
                                   port $ports keep state

                     However, one of the most common and most complained-about mis-
                 takes in firewall configuration is not realizing that the to keyword doesn’t


28   Chapter 3
in itself guarantee passage to the end point. The to keyword here means
only that a packet or connection must have a destination address that
matches those criteria in order to match the rule. The rule we just wrote
lets the traffic pass in to just the gateway itself and on the specific interface
named in the rule. To allow the packets in a bit further and to move on to
the next network, we need a matching rule that says something like this:

pass out proto tcp on bge0 from bge1:network to bge0:network \
                     port $ports keep state

     But please stop and take a moment to read those rules one more time.
This last rule allows only packets with a destination in the network directly
connected to bge0 to pass, and nothing else. If that’s exactly what you want,
fine. In other contexts, such rules are, while perfectly valid, more specific
than the situation calls for. It’s very easy to let yourself dive deeply into spe-
cific details and lose the higher-level view of the configuration’s purpose—
and maybe earn yourself a few extra rounds of debugging in the process.
     It is worth noting that the keep state part denotes the default behavior
and is redundant unless you will be adding specific state options. We will
get back to some of those in later examples.
     If there are good reasons for writing very specific rules, like the preced-
ing ones, you probably already know that you need them and why. By the
time you have finished this book (if not a bit earlier), you should be able to
articulate the circumstances when more specific rules are needed. However,
for the basic gateway configurations in this chapter, it’s likely that you’ll
want to write rules that are not interface-specific. In fact, in some cases, it
isn’t useful to specify the direction either; you’d simply use a rule like the
following to let your local network access the Internet:

pass proto tcp from bge1:network to port $ports keep state

    For simple setups, interface-bound in and out rules are likely to add
more clutter to your rulesets than they’re worth. (For some configurations
it may be appropriate to use the state option if-bound if the context requires
that a rule keeps state bound to a specific interface.) For a busy network
admin, a readable ruleset is a safer one. (And we’ll look at some additional
safety measures, like antispoof, in Chapter 10.)
    For the remainder of this book, with some exceptions, we’ll keep the
rules as simple as possible for readability.

Understanding Network Address Translation vs. IPv6
Once we start handling traffic between separate networks, it’s useful to look
at how network addresses work and why you’re likely to come across several
different addressing schemes. The subject of network addresses has been a
rich source of both confusion and buzzwords over the years. The underly-
ing facts are sometimes hard to establish, unless you go to the source and
wade through a series of RFCs. Over the next few paragraphs, I’ll make an
effort to clear up some of the confusion.

                                                                Into the Real World   29
                      For example, a widely held belief is that if you have an internal network
                 that uses a totally different address range from the one assigned to the
                 interface attached to the Internet, you’re safe, and no one from the outside
                 can get at your network resources. This belief is closely related to the idea
                 that the IP address of your firewall in the local network must be either
                 192.168.0.1 or 10.0.0.1.
                      There’s an element of truth in both notions, and those addresses are
                 common defaults. But the real story is that it’s possible to sniff one’s way
                 past network address translation, although PF offers some tricks that make
                 that task harder.
                      The real reason we use a specific set of internal address ranges and a dif-
                 ferent set of addresses for unique external address ranges isn’t primarily to
                 address security concerns. Rather, it’s the easiest way to work around a design
                 problem in the Internet protocols: a limited range of possible addresses.
                      In the 1980s, when the Internet protocols were formulated, most com-
                 puters on the Internet (or ARPANET, as it was known at the time) were large
                 machines with anything from several dozen to several thousand users each.
                 At the time, a 32-bit address space with more than four billion addresses
                 seemed quite sufficient. Thirty-two bits was also the size of the default size of
                 C language int integer type in essentially all computers at the time, and the
                 choice of data type had the positive side effect of making the TCP/IP code
                 more efficient than it would have been otherwise. However, several factors
                 have conspired to prove that early assumption wrong.
                      One factor is that the address-allocation process led to a situation
                 where the largest chunks of the available address space were already allo-
                 cated before some of the world’s more populous nations even connected to
                 the Internet. The other, and perhaps more significant, factor was that by
                 the early 1990s, the Internet was no longer a research project, but rather a
                 commercially available resource with consumers and companies of all sizes
                 consuming IP address space at an alarming rate.
                      The long-term solution was to redefine the Internet to use a larger address
                 space. In 1998, the specification for IPv6, with 128 bits of address space for
                 a total of 2128 addresses, was published as RFC 2460. But while we were wait-
                 ing for IPv6 to become generally available, we needed a stopgap solution.
                      That solution came as a series of RFCs that specified how a gateway
                 could forward traffic with IP addresses translated so that a large local net-
                 work would look like just one computer to the rest of the Internet. Certain
                 previously unallocated IP address ranges were set aside for these private
                 networks. These were free for anyone to use, on the condition that traffic in
                 those ranges wouldn’t be allowed out on the Internet untranslated.
                      Thus, network address translation (NAT) was born in the mid-1990s and
                 quickly became the default way to handle addressing in local networks. RFC
                 1631, “The IP Network Address Translator (NAT),” dated May 1994, and
                 RFC 1918, “Address Allocation for Private Internets,” dated February 1996,
                 provide the details about NAT.
                      PF supports IPv6 as well as the various IPv4 address translation tricks.
                 In fact, the BSDs were among the earliest IPv6 adopters, thanks to the
                 efforts of the K AME project. To quote the project home page at

30   Chapter 3
       https://www.kame.net, “The K AME project was a joint effort of six compa-
       nies in Japan to provide a free stack of IPv6, IPsec, and Mobile IPv6 for
       BSD variants.” The research and development activities were considered
       complete in March 2006, and the project ended. The K AME code had
       by then been incorporated in the relevant systems, and development and
       maintenance continues in the context of each operating system project.
             All systems that have PF also support both the IPv4 and the IPv6 address
       families. If your IPv4 network needs a NAT configuration, you can integrate
       the translation as needed in your PF ruleset. In other words, if you’re using
       a system that supports PF, you can be reasonably sure that your IPv6 needs
       have been taken care of, at least on the operating-system level. However,
       some operating systems with a PF port use older versions of the code, and
       it’s important to be aware that the general rule that newer PF code is better
       applies equally to the IPv6 context.

NOTE   The syntax for network address translation (NAT) differs between the OpenBSD
       and FreeBSD PF versions. On OpenBSD, the rewrite of the NAT code that went into
       OpenBSD 4.7 included a new syntax for configuring NAT and redirection. FreeBSD
       has kept the original syntax, which includes separate rules for NAT and redirection,
       intact. In contexts where it is relevant, we provide samples for both syntaxes.

           The examples in this book use mainly IPv4 addresses and NAT where
       appropriate, but most of the material is equally relevant to networks that
       have implemented IPv6.

       Defining Your Local Network
       In Chapter 2, we set up a configuration for a single, stand-alone machine.
       We’re about to extend that configuration to a gateway version, and it’s use-
       ful to define a few more macros to help readability and to conceptually sep-
       arate the local networks where you have a certain measure of control from
       everything else. So how do you define your “local” network in PF terms?
            Earlier in this chapter, you saw the interface:network notation. This is
       a nice piece of shorthand, but you can make your ruleset even more read-
       able and easier to maintain by taking the macro a bit further. For example,
       you could define a $localnet macro as the network directly attached to your
       internal interface (bge1:network in our examples). Or you could change
       the definition of $localnet to an IP address/netmask notation to denote a
       network, such as 192.168.100.0/24 for a subnet of private IPv4 addresses or
       2001:db8:dead:beef::/64 for an IPv6 range.
            If your network environment requires it, you could define your $localnet
       as a list of networks. For example, a sensible $localnet definition combined
       with pass rules that use the macro, such as the following, could end up sav-
       ing you a few headaches:

       pass proto { tcp, udp } from $localnet to port $ports

            We’ll stick to the convention of using macros such as $localnet for read-
       ability from here on.

                                                                         Into the Real World   31
                 Setting Up a Gateway
                 We’ll take the single-machine configuration we built from the ground up in
                 the previous chapter as our starting point for building our packet-filtering
                 gateway. We assume that the machine has acquired another network card
                 (or that you have set up a network connection from your local network to
                 one or more other networks via Ethernet, PPP, or other means).
                      In our context, it isn’t too interesting to look at the details of how the
                 interfaces are configured. We just need to know that the interfaces are up
                 and running.
                      For the following discussion and examples, only the interface names
                 will differ between a PPP setup and an Ethernet one, and we’ll do our best
                 to get rid of the actual interface names as quickly as possible.
                      First, because packet forwarding is off by default in all BSDs, we need to
                 turn it on in order to let the machine forward the network traffic it receives on
                 one interface to other networks via one or more separate interfaces. Initially,
                 we’ll do this on the command line with a sysctl command for traditional IPv4:

                 $ doas sysctl net.inet.ip.forwarding=1

                     To forward IPv6 traffic, we use this sysctl command:

                 $ doas sysctl net.inet6.ip6.forwarding=1

                     This is fine for now. However, in order for this to work once you reboot
                 the computer at some time in the future, you need to enter these settings
                 into the relevant configuration files.
                     In OpenBSD, you do this by editing /etc/sysctl.conf and adding IP-
                 forwarding lines to the end of the file so the last lines look like this:

                 net.inet.ip.forwarding=1
                 net.inet6.ip6.forwarding=1

                     In FreeBSD, make the change by putting these lines in your /etc/rc.conf:

                 gateway_enable=″YES″ #for ipv4
                 ipv6_gateway_enable=″YES″ #for ipv6

                     The net effect is identical; the FreeBSD rc script sets the two values via
                 sysctl commands. However, a larger part of the FreeBSD configuration is
                 centralized into the rc.conf file.
                     Now it’s time to check whether all of the interfaces you intend to use
                 are up and running. Use ifconfig -a or ifconfig interface_name to find out.
                     The output of ifconfig -a on one of my systems looks like this:

                 $ ifconfig -a
                 lo0: flags=8049<UP,LOOPBACK,RUNNING,MULTICAST> mtu 33224
                         groups: lo
                         inet 127.0.0.1 netmask 0xff000000
                         inet6 ::1 prefixlen 128
                         inet6 fe80::1%lo0 prefixlen 64 scopeid 0x5


32   Chapter 3
                xl0: flags=8843<UP,BROADCAST,RUNNING,SIMPLEX,MULTICAST> mtu 1500
                        lladdr 00:60:97:83:4a:01
                        groups: egress
                        media: Ethernet autoselect (100baseTX full-duplex)
                        status: active
                        inet 194.54.107.18 netmask 0xfffffff8 broadcast 194.54.107.23
                        inet6 fe80::260:97ff:fe83:4a01%xl0 prefixlen 64 scopeid 0x1
                fxp0: flags=8843<UP,BROADCAST,RUNNING,SIMPLEX,MULTICAST> mtu 1500
                        lladdr 00:30:05:03:fc:41
                        media: Ethernet autoselect (100baseTX full-duplex)
                        status: active
                        inet 194.54.103.65 netmask 0xffffffc0 broadcast 194.54.103.127
                        inet6 fe80::230:5ff:fe03:fc41%fxp0 prefixlen 64 scopeid 0x2
                pflog0: flags=141<UP,RUNNING,PROMISC> mtu 33224
                enc0: flags=0<> mtu 1536

                     Your setup is most likely somewhat different. Here, the physical inter-
                faces on the gateway are xl0 and fxp0. The logical interfaces lo0 (the loop-
                back interface), enc0 (the encapsulation interface for IPSEC use), and pflog0
                (the PF logging device) are probably on your system, too.
                     If you’re on a dial-up connection, you probably use some variant of PPP
                for the Internet connection, and your external interface is the tun0 pseudo-
                device. If your connection is via some sort of broadband connection, you
                may have an Ethernet interface to play with. However, if you’re in the signif-
                icant subset of ADSL users who use PPP over Ethernet (PPPoE), the correct
                external interface will be one of the pseudo-devices tun0 or pppoe0 (depend-
                ing on whether you use userland pppoe(8) or kernel mode pppoe(4)), not the
                physical Ethernet interface.
                     Depending on your specific setup, you may need to do some other
                device-specific configuration for your interfaces. After you have that set
                up, you can move on to the TCP/IP level and deal with the packet-filtering
                configuration.
                     If you still intend to allow any traffic initiated by machines on the inside,
                your /etc/pf.conf for your initial gateway setup could look roughly like this on
                OpenBSD:

ext_if = ″bge0″ # macro for external interface use tun0 or pppoe0 for PPPoE
int_if = ″bge1″ # macro for internal interface
localnet = $int_if:network
# ext_if IPv4 address could be dynamic, hence ($ext_if)
match out on $ext_if inet from $localnet nat-to ($ext_if) # NAT, match IPv4 only
block all
pass from { self, $localnet }

                    Note the use of macros to assign logical names to the network inter-
                faces. Here, Broadcom Ethernet cards are used, but this is the last time
                we’ll find this of any interest whatsoever in our context.
                    In truly simple setups like this one, we may not gain very much by using
                macros like these, but once the rulesets grow a little larger, you’ll learn to
                appreciate the readability they add.


                                                                               Into the Real World   33
                     One possible refinement to this ruleset would be to remove the macro
                 ext_if and replace the $ext_if references with the string egress, which is the
                 name of the interface group that contains the interface that has the default
                 route. Interface groups are not macros, so you would write the name egress
                 without a leading $ character.

       NOTE      On FreeBSD, the egress interface group is not created by default. You can however
                 easily create the group by adding group egress to the ifconfig_interfacename=″ ″
                 string variable in /etc/rc.conf and increase the potential readability for your PF
                 rulesets.

                      Also note the match rule with nat-to. This is where you handle NAT
                 from the nonroutable address inside your local network to the sole offi-
                 cial address assigned to you. If your network uses official, routable IPv4
                 addresses, you simply leave this line out of your configuration. The match
                 rules, which were introduced in OpenBSD 4.6, can be used to apply actions
                 when a connection matches the criteria without deciding whether a connec-
                 tion should be blocked or passed.
                      The parentheses surrounding the last part of the match rule ($ext_if)
                 are there to compensate for the possibility that the IP address of the exter-
                 nal interface may be dynamically assigned. This detail will ensure that your
                 network traffic runs without serious interruptions, even if the interface’s IP
                 address changes.
                      It’s time to sum up the ruleset we’ve built so far:
                 1. We block all traffic originating outside our own network.
                 2. We make sure all IPv4 traffic initiated by hosts in our local network will
                    pass into the outside world only with the source address rewritten to the
                    routable address assigned to the gateway’s external interface.
                 3. Finally, we let all traffic from our local network (IPv4 and IPv6 both) and
                    from the gateway itself pass.

                     The keyword self in the final pass rule is a macro-ish reserved word in PF
                 syntax that denotes all addresses assigned to all interfaces on the local host.
                     If your operating system is FreeBSD, your first gateway ruleset would
                 look something like this:

                 ext_if = ″bge0″ # macro for external interface use tun0 or pppoe0 for PPPoE
                 int_if = ″bge1″ # macro for internal interface
                 localnet = $int_if:network
                 # ext_if IP address could be dynamic, hence ($ext_if)
                 nat on $ext_if inet from $localnet to any -> ($ext_if) # NAT, match IPv4 only
                 block all
                 pass from { self, $localnet } to any keep state

                     The nat rule here handles the translation much as does the match rule
                 with nat-to in the previous example.
                     On the other hand, this ruleset probably allows more traffic than you
                 actually want to pass out of your network. In one of the networks where I’ve


34   Chapter 3
done a bit of work, the main part of the ruleset is based on a macro called
client_out:

client_out = ″{ ftp-data, ftp, ssh, domain, pop3, auth, nntp, http, \
                https, 446, cvspserver, 2628, 5999, 8000, 8080 }″

    It has this pass rule:

pass proto tcp from $localnet to port $client_out

    This may be a somewhat peculiar selection of ports, but it’s exactly what
my colleagues there needed at the time. Some of the numbered ports were
needed for systems that were set up for specific purposes at other sites.
    Your needs probably differ at least in some details, but this should cover
some of the more useful services. Please take the previous sentence as a strong
hint that this particular list of ports and services should not be copied blindly
into your own configuration.
    Here’s another pass rule that is useful to those who want the ability to
administer machines from elsewhere:

pass in proto tcp to port ssh

    Or use this form, if you prefer:

pass in proto tcp to $ext_if port ssh

     When you leave out the from part entirely, the default is from any, which
is quite permissive. It lets you log in from anywhere, which is great if you
travel a lot and need SSH access from unknown locations around the world.
If you’re not all that mobile—say you haven’t quite developed the taste for
conferences in far-flung locations, or you feel your colleagues can fend for
themselves while you’re on vacation—you may want to tighten up with a
from part that includes only the places where you and other administrators
are likely to log in from for legitimate reasons.
     Our very basic ruleset is still not complete. Next, we need to make the
name service work for our clients. We start with another macro at the start
of our ruleset:

udp_services = ″{ domain, ntp }″

    This is supplemented with a rule that passes the traffic we want through
our firewall:

pass quick proto udp to port $udp_services

    Note the quick keyword in this rule. We’ve started writing rulesets that
consist of several rules, and it’s time to revisit the relationships and interac-
tions between them.
    As noted in the previous chapter, the rules are evaluated from top to
bottom in the sequence they’re written in the configuration file. For each

                                                                Into the Real World   35
                 packet or connection evaluated by PF, the last matching rule in the ruleset is
                 the one that’s applied.
                      The quick keyword offers an escape from the ordinary sequence. When
                 a packet matches a quick rule, the packet is treated according to the pres-
                 ent rule. The rule processing stops without considering any further rules
                 that might have matched the packet. As your rulesets grow longer and more
                 complicated, you’ll find this quite handy. For example, it’s useful when you
                 need a few isolated exceptions to your general rules.
                      This quick rule also takes care of NTP, which is used for time synch-
                 ronization. However, the name service requires a little more attention.
                 Under certain circumstances, such as when a name response would not fit
                 in a single packet, the name service needs to communicate over TCP in
                 addition to UDP. This means we need to add the following rule

                 pass quick proto tcp to port domain

                 to make the ruleset fully functional.

                 A Point of Policy Enforcement
                 At this point it is useful to keep in mind that we have been building a gate-
                 way into what amounts to a firewall, or if you will, a point of policy enforcement.
                      The ruleset we have looked at over the last few pages could, after some
                 assembly, look something like this, with macros that expand into lists of
                 the services the client in your network will want to contact elsewhere. Here
                 is the expression of your stated policies, in your point of enforcement PF
                 ruleset:

                 ext_if=bge0
                 int_if=bge1
                 client_out = ″{ ftp-data, ftp, ssh, domain, pop3, auth, nntp, http, \
                                 https, 2628, 5999, 8000, 8080 }″
                 udp_services = ″{ domain, ntp }″
                 match out on egress inet nat-to ($ext_if)
                 block
                 pass quick proto udp to port $udp_services
                 pass quick proto tcp to port domain
                 pass proto tcp from $int_if:network to port $client_out
                 pass proto tcp to self port ssh

                     For FreeBSD, you would need to replace the match rule with nat-to
                 with this:

                 nat on $ext_if inet from $localnet to any -> ($ext_if)     # NAT, match IPv4 only

                     Now we should ask, “What services do your clients consume?”
                     Your network more than likely has a different set of desired services.
                 (Yes, really. The list of ports and service names that are appropriate for
                 your environment or environments is likely to differ significantly from the
                 example here. Again, do not paste mindlessly.)


36   Chapter 3
     Now is the time to implement those by customizing from the sample,
and then move on to testing that you have indeed implemented your speci-
fication and your policies.

Testing Your Ruleset
You may not have gotten around to writing that formal test suite for your
rulesets just yet, but there’s every reason to test that your configuration
works as expected.
    The same basic tests in the stand-alone example from the previous
chapter still apply. But now you need to test from the other hosts in your
network as well as from your packet-filtering gateway. For each of the ser-
vices you specified in your pass rules, test that machines in your local net-
work get meaningful results. From any machine in your local network, enter
a command like this:

$ host nostarch.com

    It should return exactly the same results as when you tested the stand-
alone ruleset in the previous chapter, and traffic for the services you have
specified should pass.
    This is true unless, of course, the information changed in the mean-
time. Some sysadmins are fond of practical jokes, but most of the time
changes in DNS zone information are due to real-world needs in that par-
ticular organization or network.
    You may not think it’s necessary, but it doesn’t hurt to check that the
ruleset works as expected from outside your gateway as well. If you’ve done
exactly what this chapter says so far, it shouldn’t be possible to contact
machines in your local network from the outside.



             W H Y ONLY IP ADDRESSES — NOT HOS TNAMES
                              OR DOMAIN NAMES?

    Looking at the examples up to this point, you’ve probably noticed that the
    rulesets all have macros that expand into IP addresses or address ranges but
    never into hostnames or domain names. You’re probably wondering why. After
    all, you’ve seen that PF lets you use service names in your ruleset, so why not
    include hostnames or domain names?
          The answer is that if you used domain names and hostnames in your
    ruleset, the ruleset would be valid only after the name service was running
    and accessible. In the default configuration, PF is loaded before any network
    services are running. This means that if you want to use domain names and
    hostnames in your PF configuration, you’ll need to change the system’s startup
    sequence (by editing /etc/rc.local, perhaps) to load the name service—
    dependent ruleset only after the name service is available. Keep in mind also
                                                                       (continued)



                                                                     Into the Real World   37
                     that once the ruleset has successfully loaded with the names resolved to IP
                     addresses, there is no mechanism in place to refresh the name to IP address
                     mapping other than reloading the ruleset. If you have only a limited number of
                     hostnames or domain names you want to reference in your PF configuration, it’s
                     at least as useful to add those as IP addresses to name-mapping entries in your
                     /etc/hosts file and leave the rc scripts alone.




     Tables Make Your Life Easier
                 By now, you may be thinking that this setup gets awfully static and rigid.
                 There will, after all, be some kinds of data relevant to filtering and redirec-
                 tion at a given time, but they don’t deserve to be put into a configuration
                 file! Quite right, and PF offers mechanisms for handling those situations.
                      Tables are one such feature. They’re useful as lists of IP addresses that
                 can be manipulated without reloading the entire ruleset and also when fast
                 lookups are desirable.
                      Table names are always enclosed in < >, like this:

                 table <clients> persist { 192.168.2.0/24, !192.168.2.5 }

                     Here, the network 192.168.2.0/24 is part of the table with one exception:
                 The address 192.168.2.5 is excluded using the ! operator (logical NOT).
                 The persist keyword makes sure the table itself will exist, even if no rules
                 currently refer to it.
                     It’s also possible to load tables from files where each item is on a sepa-
                 rate line, such as the /etc/clients file:

                 192.168.2.0/24
                 !192.168.2.5

                     This, in turn, is used to initialize the table in /etc/pf.conf:

                 table <clients> persist file ″/etc/clients″

                      So, for example, you can change one of our earlier rules to read like
                 this to manage outgoing traffic from your client computers:

                 pass inet proto tcp from <clients> to any port $client_out

                     With that in hand, you can manipulate the table’s contents live, like so:

                 $ doas pfctl -t clients -T add 192.168.1/16




38   Chapter 3
                    Note that this changes the in-memory copy of the table only, mean-
                ing that the change will not survive a power failure or reboot, unless you
                arrange to store your changes.
                    You might opt to maintain the on-disk copy of the table with a cron job
                that dumps the table content to disk at regular intervals, using a command
                such as the following:

                $ doas pfctl -t clients -T show >/etc/clients

                    Alternatively, you could edit the /etc/clients file and replace the in-memory
                table contents with the file data:

                $ doas pfctl -t clients -T replace -f /etc/clients

                    For operations you’ll be performing frequently, sooner or later, you’ll
                end up writing shell scripts. It’s likely that routine operations on tables,
                such as inserting or removing items or replacing table contents, will be part
                of your housekeeping scripts in the near future.
                    One common example is to enforce network access restrictions via cron
                jobs that replace the contents of the tables referenced as from addresses in
                the pass rules at specific times. In some networks, you may even need differ-
                ent access rules for different days of the week. The only real limitations lie
                in your own needs and your creativity.
                    Now that you have become familiar with tables, it is time to introduce
                one of the several applications in the OpenBSD base system that can inter-
                act with and maintain tables in your ruleset.

                Let dhcpd(8) Direct Access
                In a scenario like ours, where the local network consists only of clients that
                need to access resources outside their own network, more likely than not
                those clients get their IP addresses and other crucial parts of their basic
                IPv4 network configuration from a DHCP server.
                     If your gateway is an OpenBSD machine that also serves as the local
                DHCP server that runs the OpenBSD dhcpd, you can set it up so that the gate-
                way will pass traffic only from clients that got their IPv4 address assigned by
                the local DHCP service. To achieve this, enter the following line in your /etc/
                rc.conf.local:

dhcpd_flags=″-L leased_ip_table -A abandoned_ip_table -C changed_ip_table bge1″

                     Here, the -L, -A and -C flags are used to specify the names of the tables
                for the DHCP server’s currently leased IP addresses, addresses that did not
                get renewed by lease expiry timeout (abandoned), and finally addresses
                that have been reassigned (changed) to be associated with a new hardware
                address, respectively. The final argument on the line is the name of the
                interface dhcpd should listen on.




                                                                               Into the Real World   39
                     With these names in hand, define the tables in your /etc/pf.conf

                 ext_if=bge0
                 int_if=bge1
                 table <abandoned_ip_table> persist counters
                 table <changed_ip_table> persist counters
                 table <leased_ip_table> persist counters
                 client_out = ″{ ftp-data, ftp, ssh, domain, pop3, auth, nntp, http, \
                                 https, 2628, 5999, 8000, 8080 }″
                 udp_services = ″{ domain, ntp }″
                 match out on egress inet nat-to ($ext_if)
                 block
                 pass quick proto udp to port $udp_services
                 pass quick proto tcp to port domain
                 pass proto tcp from <leased_ip_table> to port $client_out
                 pass proto tcp to self port ssh

                 and make sure the names in the dhcpd_flags= line in /etc/rc.conf.local matches
                 the table names in your /etc/pf.conf exactly.
                     After saving both files, reload your ruleset:

                 $ doas pfctl -vf /etc/pf.conf

                 Then enable dhcpd if it was not already enabled, and start the daemon:

                 $ doas rcctl enable dhcpd
                 $ doas rcctl start dhcpd

                      As the clients get their addresses assigned from the now-running dhcpd,
                 you will also see them appear in the leased_ip_table table. Once the clients
                 in your network have been assigned addresses by your now in-control dhcpd,
                 only those clients will be allowed to communicate with services outside your
                 network.
                      The OpenBSD base system has several other programs that can be made
                 to interact with tables. Several of them are in the FreeBSD base system as
                 well or, like the OpenBSD dhcpd, within easy reach as ports or packages.
                      We’ll be returning to some handy uses of tables frequently over the
                 next chapters, and we’ll look at a few programs that interact with tables in
                 useful ways.


     Making Your Network Troubleshooting-Friendly
                 Making your network troubleshooting-friendly is a potentially large subject.
                 Generally, the debugging- or troubleshooting-friendliness of your TCP/IP
                 network depends on how you treat the Internet protocol that was designed
                 specifically with debugging in mind: ICMP.
                     ICMP is the protocol for sending and receiving control messages between
                 hosts and gateways, mainly to provide feedback to a sender about any unusual
                 or difficult conditions en route to the target host.



40   Chapter 3
     There’s a lot of ICMP traffic, which usually happens in the background
while you are surfing the web, reading mail, or transferring files. Routers
(remember, you’re building one) use ICMP to negotiate packet sizes and
other transmission parameters in a process often referred to as path MTU
discovery.
     You may have heard admins refer to ICMP as either “evil” or, if their
understanding runs a little deeper, “a necessary evil.” The reason for this
attitude is purely historical. Quite a few years back, it was discovered that the
networking stacks of several operating systems contained code that could
make the machine crash if it were sent a sufficiently large ICMP request.
     One of the companies that was hit hard by this was Microsoft, and you
can find a lot of material on the ping of death bug by using your favorite
search engine. However, this all happened in the second half of the 1990s,
and all modern operating systems have thoroughly sanitized their network
code since then (at least, that’s what we’re led to believe).
     One of the early work-arounds was to simply block either ICMP echo
(ping) requests or even all ICMP traffic. That measure almost certainly led
to poor performance and hard-to-debug network problems. In some places,
however, these rulesets have been around for almost three decades, and the
people who put them there are still scared. There’s most likely little to no
reason to worry about destructive ICMP traffic anymore, but here we’ll look
at how to manage just what ICMP traffic passes to or from your network.
     In modern IPv6 networks, the updated icmp6 protocol plays a more cru-
cial role than ever in parameter passing and even host configuration, and
network admins are playing a high-stakes game while learning the finer
points of blocking or passing icmp6 traffic. To a large extent, issues that are
relevant for IPv4 ICMP generally apply to IPv6 ICMP6 as well, but in addi-
tion, ICMP6 is used for several mechanisms that were handled differently
in IPv4. We’ll dip into some of these issues after walking through the issues
that are relevant for both IP protocol versions.

Do We Let It All Through?
The obvious question becomes, “If ICMP is such a good and useful thing,
shouldn’t we let it all through all the time?” The answer is that it depends.
     Letting diagnostic traffic pass unconditionally makes debugging easier,
of course, but it also makes it relatively easy for others to extract informa-
tion about your network. So, a rule like the following might not be optimal
if you want to cloak the internal workings of your IPv4 network:

pass inet proto icmp

    If you want the same free flow of messages for your IPv6 traffic, the cor-
responding rule is this:

pass inet6 proto icmp6

   In all fairness, it should also be said that you might find some ICMP and
ICMP6 traffic quite harmlessly riding piggyback on your keep state rules.

                                                               Into the Real World   41
                 The Easy Way Out: The Buck Stops Here
                 The easiest solution could very well be to allow all ICMP and ICMP6 traffic
                 from your local network through and to let probes from elsewhere stop at
                 your gateway:

                 pass inet proto icmp from $localnet icmp-type $icmp_types
                 pass inet proto icmp to $ext_if icmp-type $icmp_types
                 pass inet6 proto icmp6 from $localnet icmp6-type $icmp6_types
                 pass inet6 proto icmp6 to $ext_if icmp6-type $icmp6_types

                      This is assuming, of course, that you’ve identified the list of desirable
                 ICMP and ICMP6 types to fill out your macro definitions. We’ll get back to
                 those shortly. Stopping probes at the gateway might be an attractive option
                 anyway, but let’s look at a few other options that’ll demonstrate some of PF’s
                 flexibility.

                 Let ping Through
                 The ruleset we have developed so far in this chapter has one clear disadvan-
                 tage: Common troubleshooting commands, such as ping and traceroute (and
                 their IPv6 equivalents, ping6 and traceroute6), will not work. That may not
                 matter too much to your users, and because it was the ping command that
                 scared people into filtering or blocking ICMP traffic in the first place, there
                 are apparently some people who feel we’re better off without it. However,
                 you’ll find these troubleshooting tools useful. And with a couple of small
                 additions to the ruleset, they will be available to you.
                     The diagnostic commands ping and ping6 rely on the ICMP and ICMP6
                 echo request (and the matching echo reply) types, and in order to keep our
                 ruleset tidy, we start by defining another set of macros:

                 icmp_types = ″echoreq″
                 icmp6_types = ″echoreq″

                     Then, we add rules that use the definitions:

                 pass inet proto icmp icmp-type $icmp_types
                 pass inet6 proto icmp6 icmp6-type $icmp6_types

                     The macros and the rules mean that ICMP and ICMP6 packets with
                 type echo request will be allowed through and matching echo replies will
                 be allowed to pass back due to PF’s stateful nature. This is all the ping and
                 ping6 commands need in order to produce their expected results.
                     If you need more or other types of ICMP or ICMP6 packets to go
                 through, you can expand icmp_types and icmp6_types to lists of those packet
                 types you want to allow.




42   Chapter 3
Helping traceroute
The traceroute command (and the IPv6 variant traceroute6) is useful when
your users claim that the Internet isn’t working. By default, Unix traceroute
uses UDP connections according to a set formula based on destination. The
following rules work with the traceroute and traceroute6 commands on all
forms of Unix I’ve had access to, including GNU/Linux:

# allow out the default range for traceroute(8):
# ″base+nhops*nqueries-1″ (33434+64*3-1)
pass out on egress inet proto udp to port 33433:33626 # For IPv4
pass out on egress inet6 proto udp to port 33433:33626 # For IPv6

     This also gives you a first taste of what port ranges look like. They’re
quite useful in some contexts.
     Experience so far indicates that traceroute and traceroute6 implementa-
tions on other operating systems work roughly the same way. One notable
exception is Microsoft Windows. On that platform, the tracert.exe program and
its IPv6 sister tracert6.exe use ICMP echo requests for this purpose. So if you
want to let Windows traceroutes through, you need only the first rule, much
as when letting ping through. The Unix traceroute program can be instructed
to use other protocols as well and will behave remarkably like its Microsoft
counterpart if you use its -I command line option. You can check the
traceroute man page (or its source code, for that matter) for all the details.
     This solution is based on a sample rule I found in an openbsd-misc post.
I’ve found that list, and the searchable list archives (accessible among other
places from https://marc.info), to be a valuable resource whenever you need
OpenBSD or PF-related information.

Path MTU Discovery
The last bit I’ll remind you about when it comes to troubleshooting is
the path MTU discovery. Internet protocols are designed to be device-
independent, and one consequence of device independence is that you
cannot always predict reliably what the optimal packet size is for a given
connection. The main constraint on your packet size is called the maximum
transmission unit, or MTU, which sets the upper limit on the packet size
for an interface. The ifconfig command will show you the MTU for your
network interfaces.
     Modern TCP/IP implementations expect to be able to determine
the correct packet size for a connection and adjust if needed through a
process that simply involves sending packets of whatever sizes the traf-
fic needs within the MTU of the local link. If a packet exceeds the MTU
somewhere along the way to the destination, the host with the lower MTU
will return an ICMP packet indicating the nature of the problem. One
common response in MTU mismatch cases would be ICMP “type 3, code
4” along with the size of the local MTU. Now, you don’t need to dive for
the RFCs right away. Type 3 means “destination unreachable,” and code 4 is
short for “fragmentation needed, but the ‘do not fragment’ flag is set.” So if


                                                             Into the Real World   43
                 your connections to other networks, which may have MTUs that differ from
                 your own, seem suboptimal, you could try changing your list of ICMP types
                 slightly to let the IPv4 destination-unreachable packets through:

                 icmp_types = ″{ echoreq, unreach }″

                      As you can see, this means you do not need to change the pass rule
                 itself:

                 pass inet proto icmp icmp-type $icmp_types

                     Now I’ll let you in on a little secret: In almost all cases, these rules
                 aren’t necessary for purposes of path MTU discovery (but they don’t hurt
                 either). However, even though the default PF keep state behavior takes care
                 of most of the ICMP traffic you’ll need, PF does let you filter on all varia-
                 tions of ICMP types and codes. For IPv6, you’d probably want to let the
                 more common ICMP6 diagnostics through, such as the following:

                 icmp6_types = ″{ echoreq unreach timex paramprob }″

                     This means that we let echo requests and destination unreachable, time
                 exceeded, and parameter problem messages pass for IPv6 traffic. Thanks to
                 the macro definitions, you don’t need to touch the pass rule for the ICMP6
                 case either:

                 pass inet6 proto icmp6 icmp6-type $icmp6_types

                      But it’s worth keeping in mind that IPv6 hosts rely on ICMP6 messages
                 for automatic configuration-related tasks, and you may want to explicitly
                 filter in order to allow or deny specific ICMP6 types at various points in
                 your network.
                      For example, you’ll want to let a router and its clients exchange router
                 solicitation and router advertisement messages (ICMP6 type routeradv and
                 routersol, respectively), while you may want to make sure that neighbor adver-
                 tisements and neighbor solicitations (ICMP6 type neighbradv and neighbrsol,
                 respectively) stay confined within their directly connected networks.
                      If you want to delve into more detail, the list of possible types and codes
                 are documented in the icmp(4) and icmp6(4) man pages. The background
                 information is available in the RFCs.
                      The main RFCs describing ICMP and some related techniques are 792,
                 950, 1191, 1256, 2521, and 6145. ICMP updates for IPv6 are in RFC 3542
                 and RFC 4443. These documents are available in a number of places on the
                 web, such as https://www.ietf.org and http://www.faqs.org/faqs/ and probably
                 also via your package system.




44   Chapter 3
       That Sad Old FTP Thing
       The short list of real-life TCP ports we looked at a few moments back con-
       tained, among other things, FTP, the classic file transfer protocol. FTP is
       a relic of the early Internet, when experiments were the norm and security
       was not really on the horizon in any modern sense.

NOTE   Before we delve into the history lesson, let me make one thing clear: File transfers in
       the modern world can be achieved more easily, and more securely, by setting up a suit-
       able HTTPS-enabled web service, which likely can be equipped with authentication
       suitable for the need at hand. Alternatively, it should be possible to for authenticated
       file transfers via SCP or SFTP.

           But back to the historical background. FTP actually predates TCP/IP,
       and it’s possible to track the protocol’s development through more than
       50 RFCs. The earliest RFC describing the FTP protocol is RFC 114, dated
       April 10, 1971. The switch to TCP/IP happened with FTP version 5, as
       defined in RFCs 765 and 775, dated June and December 1980, respectively.
           After more than 50 years, FTP is both a sad old thing and a problem
       child—emphatically so for anyone trying to combine FTP and firewalls.
       FTP is an old and weird protocol with a lot to dislike.
           Here are the most common points against it:
       •   Passwords are transferred in the clear. An encrypted version of the
           protocol, dubbed FTPS, is specified in RFC 4217, but support remains
           somewhat spotty.
       •   The protocol demands the use of at least two TCP connections (control
           and data) on separate ports.
       •   When a session is established, data is communicated via ports usually
           selected at random.
            All of these points make for challenges security-wise, even before con-
       sidering any potential weaknesses in client or server software that may lead
       to security issues. As any network graybeard will tell you, these things tend
       to crop up when you need them the least.
            Under any circumstances, other more modern and more secure options
       for file transfer exist, such as SFTP and SCP noted earlier, which feature
       both authentication and data transfer via encrypted connections. Competent
       IT professionals should have a preference for some form of file transfer other
       than FTP.
            Regardless of our professionalism and preferences, we sometimes
       must deal with things we would prefer not to use at all. In the case of FTP
       through firewalls, we can combat problems by redirecting the traffic to a




                                                                           Into the Real World   45
                 small program that’s written specifically for this purpose. The upside for
                 us is that handling FTP offers us a chance to look at two fairly advanced PF
                 features: redirection and anchors.
                      The easiest way to handle FTP in a default-to-block scenario such as
                 ours is to have PF redirect the traffic for that service to an external applica-
                 tion that acts as a proxy for the service. The proxy maintains its own named
                 sub-ruleset (an anchor in PF terminology), where it inserts or deletes rules
                 as needed for the FTP traffic. The combination of redirection and the
                 anchor provides a clean, well-defined interface between the packet-filtering
                 subsystem and the proxy.

                 If We Must: ftp-proxy with Divert or Redirect
                 Enabling FTP transfers through your gateway is amazingly simple, thanks
                 to the FTP-proxy program included in the OpenBSD base system. The pro-
                 gram is called—you guessed it—ftp-proxy.
                      The easiest and preferred way to enable the proxy is to use the rcctl
                 command:

                 $ doas rcctl enable ftpproxy

                     This will add this line to your /etc/rc.conf.local file on OpenBSD

                 ftpproxy_flags=″″

                 and add the proxy to the list of services to be started. For most purposes the
                 proxy will work with no command line arguments, but if any are needed,
                 the ftpproxy_flags variable is where you fill them in.
                     Then you can move on to making the changes you need to the PF con-
                 figuration to accommodate the proxy.
                     On FreeBSD, the command to enable the proxy is:

                 $ sudo service ftp-proxy enable

                     That command adds the following line to /etc/rc.conf:

                 ftpproxy_enable=″YES″

                     With that setting in place, you can start the proxy:

                 $ sudo service ftp-proxy enable

                     Then you can go on to editing your ruleset.
                     If your configuration requires that you specify any command line
                 options to ftp-proxy, put them in the ftpproxy_flags variable in /etc/rc.conf:

                 ftpproxy_flags=″″ # put any command line options here

                      You can start the proxy manually by running /usr/sbin/ftp-proxy if you
                 like, but this is probably useful only for limited testing purposes.


46   Chapter 3
                     For a basic configuration, you need to add only three elements to /etc/
                pf.conf: the anchor and two pass rules. The anchor declaration looks like this:

                anchor ″ftp-proxy/*″

                    FreeBSD uses the pre-OpenBSD 4.7 syntax, where two anchor declara-
                tions are needed:

                nat-anchor ″ftp-proxy/*″
                rdr-anchor ″ftp-proxy/*″

                    The proxy inserts the rules it generates for the FTP sessions here. Then,
                you also need a pass rule to let FTP traffic into the proxy:

                pass in quick inet proto tcp to port ftp divert-to 127.0.0.1 port 8021

                    Note the divert-to part. This redirects the traffic to the local port,
                where the proxy listens via the highly efficient, local connections–only
                divert(4) interface. In OpenBSD versions 4.9 and older, the traffic diversion
                happened via an rdr-to. If you’re upgrading an existing pre-OpenBSD 5.0
                configuration, you’ll need to update your rdr-to rules for the FTP proxy to
                use divert-to instead.
                    Again, for FreeBSD, you need this version of the redirection rule:

rdr pass on $int_if inet proto tcp from any to any port ftp -> 127.0.0.1 port 8021

                    Finally, make sure your ruleset contains a pass rule to let the packets
                pass from the proxy to the rest of the world, where $proxy expands to the
                address to which the proxy daemon is bound:

                pass out inet proto tcp from $proxy to any port ftp

                     Reload your PF configuration:

                $ doas pfctl -f /etc/pf.conf

                     Before you know it, your users will thank you for making FTP work.

                Variations on the ftp-proxy Setup
                The preceding example covers a basic setup where the clients in your local
                network need to contact FTP servers elsewhere. This configuration should
                work well with most combinations of FTP clients and servers.
                     You can change the proxy’s behavior in various ways by adding options
                to the ftpproxy_flags= line. You may bump into clients or servers with specific
                quirks that you need to compensate for in your configuration, or you may
                want to integrate the proxy in your setup in specific ways, such as assigning
                FTP traffic to a specific queue. For these and other finer points of ftp-proxy
                configuration, your best bet is to start by studying the man page.



                                                                              Into the Real World   47
                     If you’re interested in ways to run an FTP server protected by PF and
                 ftp-proxy, you could look into running a separate ftp-proxy in reverse mode
                 (using the -R option) on a separate port with its own redirecting pass rule.
                 It’s even possible to set up the proxy to run in IPv6 mode by enabling and
                 starting the ftpproxy6 service, but if you’re ahead of the pack in running
                 the modern protocol, you’re less likely to bother with FTP as your main file
                 transfer protocol.

       NOTE      If your PF version predates the ones described here, you’re running on an outdated,
                 unsupported operating system. I strongly urge you to schedule an operating system
                 upgrade as soon as possible. If an upgrade is for some reason not an option, please
                 look up earlier editions of this book and study the documentation for your operating
                 system for information on how to use some earlier FTP proxies.



     Basics and History Covered, We Move On
                 In this chapter we built a basic network for clients that need to access ser-
                 vices outside their own network, and we looked into making the configura-
                 tion flexible, yet secure. With those basics in place, we moved on to making
                 that network more suitable for daily work and troubleshooting.
                      Finally we covered one prime example of a protocol and service that is a
                 relic of the earliest Internet, generally not wanted in the modern world but
                 sometimes anyway unavoidable. This in turn provided an opportunity for
                 exploring how the network trickery at the heart of the packet filtering part
                 of the TCP/IP stack can help accommodate old weirdness while keeping
                 security relatively intact.
                      Over the next chapters we will look at further applications of the
                 techniques we introduce in this chapter in more challenging or advanced
                 scenarios.




48   Chapter 3
