    Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl




                        CHAPTER 4
                Creating Light
                  with LEDs


L
      ights, especially LEDs, are used all the time in
      electronics. Sometimes, they are just simple
      indicators that show whether a toy is on,
but they can also be part of more complicated
devices, like a handheld screen. In fact, many
screens are actually made up of millions of
tiny LEDs.
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


         In this chapter, you’ll learn about an important concept in elec-
     tronics: resistance. Then you’ll see resistance in action by using a
     component called a resistor to create your first proper LED circuit
     without killing it.
         In Chapter 3, you learned that an LED is a component that creates
     light when current flows through it. But LEDs are also very sensitive
     to currents. Too little current, and the LED won’t light up. Too much
     current, and the LED gets destroyed in an instant. In this chapter, I’ll
     show you how to kill an LED, but don’t worry—you’ll learn how to use
     resistors to keep LEDs alive too.
         You’re also going to start using a new tool, called a breadboard, to
     connect circuits. Many projects in this book use breadboards. You can
     also use them to build a lot of cool projects on your own.



       Project #6: Let’s Destroy an LED
     Almost all electronics have some LEDs. Where there are LEDs, there
     are also resistors. Look around a house, and there’s a good chance
     you’ll see a few. For example, check a computer, a washing machine,
     a television, or a Wi-Fi router. Do you see some blinking lights when
     you push buttons? Those are very likely LEDs in series with resistors.
         In “Project #5: Turn On a Light with Lemon Power” on page 31,
     you just connected an LED to your homemade lemon battery, and
     that was that. In most circuits, however, you need to take a bit more
     care to make sure you don’t break your LED. If too much current flows
     through an LED, it becomes really hot and burns out. The lemon bat-
     tery was too weak to provide enough current to break the LED.
          Of course, I could tell you all this forever, but trying things in real
     life is the best way to learn! I had to break a few LEDs myself before
     I accepted that I couldn’t connect them directly to a battery without
     a resistor, and I want you to see what that’s like. That’s why in this
     project you’re going to destroy an LED!



42   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl



Shopping List
   ` A 9 V battery (DigiKey # P687-ND) to power the circuit
   ` A standard LED (DigiKey # 754-1264-ND) that you can spare.
     This LED will die. ☹

Step 1: Identify Which LED Leg Is Which
Look at your LED closely, and you should see that one leg is longer
than the other. LEDs are polarized, which means that current flows
through them only if you connect them
a certain way in your circuit. Remember
from Chapter 3 that the longer leg is
called the anode. It’s the leg that you
connect to the positive side of the        cathode (-)         anode (+)
battery. The shorter leg is called the     short leg or        long leg
cathode, and you connect it to the            flat side
negative side of the battery.
    If both legs of an LED are the same
length, find the flat side on the bottom of the LED housing: The leg
on that side is the cathode. It can be hard to see, but when you roll
                          the LED on a flat surface, you’ll feel which
                          side is flat.

                              Step 2: Break That LED!
                   anode
cathode                       Hold the LED by one of its legs—the housing
                              will get warm! Then place the 9 V battery
                              on the table and touch the legs of the LED
          -          +
                              directly to the battery terminals.
                                 The LED should glow brightly for a
                              short moment, become hot, and then go
                              dark. Parts of it may actually turn black.
              9V              Congratulations—you broke your first LED!




                                                                    CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS   43
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl



         NOTE* Some LEDs immediately stop working when connected
           directly to a battery, while others may emit a bit of light for a
           few seconds.


     What If Nothing Happens to the LED?
     If nothing happens, there are four likely causes:
         · You connected the LED backward.
         · The LED is already broken.
         · The LED died so fast that you didn’t notice.
         · The battery is dead.
        First, try connecting your LED to the battery the other way
     around. If you’re sure it’s connected the right way, try replacing the
     battery. If that doesn’t work, replace the LED.
         Even though it’s pretty fun to destroy LEDs, it’s better to avoid
     destroying them. Your LED broke because it had too much current
     running through it. Now it’s time to learn how to reduce the current in
     a circuit.



     Meet the Resistor
     A resistor is a component that adds resistance to a circuit.
     It is measured in ohms (Ω). In Chapter 1, you learned
     that resistance is closely linked with voltage and
     current. The more resistance your circuit has,
     the less current will flow through it, as long
     as the voltage stays the same.
         At first, you might find the resistor a bit boring. If you connect one
     to a battery, you probably won’t see anything happen. The resistor
     might just get warm, and you might wonder what the big deal is. On
     the other hand, if you use a resistor with a very low resistance value,
     such as 10 Ω, then it could get really hot—hot enough to give you a
     burn—and the battery might die pretty quickly.


44   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


    But the cool thing about resistors is that you can use them to
change the voltages and currents in your circuit! That means that you
get to be the master of your circuit and decide how it should behave.
   This also means you can use resistors to reduce the current to an
LED—and avoid destroying it!

Resistor Color Codes
Resistors often have four or five colored bands around them. These
colors tell you their resistance value.




                       first second
                       digit  digit multiplier tolerance
                         0      0      x1 Ω
                         1      1     x10 Ω        ±1%
                         2      2    x100 Ω       ±2%
                         3      3     x1 kΩ
                         4      4    x10 kΩ
                         5      5   x100 kΩ
                         6      6     x1 MΩ
                         7      7
                         8      8    x0.1 Ω       ±5%
                         9      9    x.01 Ω       ±10%

    From the left, the first band is the first digit of the resistance
value. In this example, the first band is yellow, so the first digit is 4.
The second digit is given by the second band, which is purple for 7.
Together, this gives you the base value of 47. The third band is the
multiplier. You multiply the first two numbers (47) by the value of the
multiplier. The brown band stands for 10 Ω, so we multiply 47 by 10:
                                   47 x 10 Ω = 470 Ω




                                                                    CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS   45
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl



         NOTE* If a resistor has five bands instead of four, then the first
           three bands are digits, and the fourth is the multiplier.


         The actual resistance of a resistor usually won’t quite match the
     value written on it. The fourth color band on a resistor tells you its
     tolerance, or how far off the real value could be.
         You read the color bands on a resistor from left to right, but how
     can you tell which end is which? Usually, the three bands that tell you
     the resistance value are grouped together, and the tolerance band is
     spaced a bit farther away. Also, the tolerance band is usually gold or
     silver, so if you see a band of one of those colors, that’s the right side
     of the resistor.



          How to Write Large Values
          On the resistance color chart, some values have k or M in
          front of the Ω symbol. These are shorthands (or abbreviations)
          that make writing large values much easier. The k is short for
          kilo, which means 1,000. If a resistor is 3,300 Ω, for example,
          you can shorten that to 3.3 kΩ (3.3 Ω × 1,000 Ω = 3,300 Ω).
          This is sometimes written as 3k3 for an even shorter version.
          The M stands for mega, which means 1 million; instead of
          writing 3,000,000 Ω, you can write 3 MΩ (3 Ω × 1,000,000 Ω
          = 3,000,000 Ω).




     Introducing Ohm’s Law
     The key to controlling the current and voltage in your circuit is a for-
     mula called Ohm’s law:
                                     V=IxR




46   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


   In this formula:
   V stands for voltage, measured in volts (V).
   I stands for current, measured in amps (A).
   R is resistance, measured in ohms (Ω).
   This shows you how voltage, current, and resistance are con-
nected in a circuit. If you change one of these, it will cause a predict-
able change in the others.
  You can write Ohm’s law in three different ways, depending on
what you want to calculate.
   To calculate voltage:
                                   Voltage (in volts) equals the
                    = x            current (in amps) multiplied
                                   by the resistance (in ohms)

   To calculate resistance:
                                   Resistance (in ohms) equals
                       =           the voltage (in volts) divided
                                   by the current (in amps)

   To calculate current:
                                   Current (in amps) equals
                       =           the voltage (in volts) divided
                                   by the resistance (in ohms)

   Don’t bother memorizing these! Instead, use this triangle:




                                            V

                                      I           R
   Print or draw the triangle on a piece of paper and keep it on your
desk. Whenever you need to calculate something, hold your hand
over it, and the formula appears.

                                                                    CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS   47
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl



                                Example: Voltage
                 V              Hold your hand over the V in the triangle. Look
                                at the I and the R. They are next to each other, so
                               you need to multiply them:
           I         R
                                                     = x
                         Example: Resistance
                 V
                           Hold your hand over the R. Then look at the V and
                              the I. V is above I, so you need to divide V by I:
           I         R
                                                      =

                         Example: Current
                 V
                           Hold your hand over the I in the triangle. Now the V
                            is above the R, so you need to divide V by R:
           I         R
                                                     =

     Ohm’s Law Example Calculation
     It’s time to put Ohm’s law to work. Imagine you have a resistor and
     a 9 V battery, and you want 0.05 A of current to flow in the resistor.
     What resistance value do you need for the resistor to get 0.05 A of
     current flowing? You can use Ohm’s law to find out by typing it into
     a calculator.

                                            =

                                                9V
                                            =
                                              0.05 A
                                            = 180 Ω

48   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


   After dividing the voltage by the current, you find that you need a
180 Ω resistor to get 0.05 A of current flowing in the resistor.




                180 Ω                                 9V


Protect an LED with a Resistor
The more current that flows through LEDs, the brighter they shine.
By using a resistor and carefully selecting its value, you can control
the brightness of an LED and, at the same time, make sure you don’t
damage it. To do so, you need to figure out two things:
   · The voltage the LED needs
   · The current you want to flow through the LED




                                                        9V


    Most standard LEDs need about 2 to 3 V. If you don’t know the
voltage your LED needs, it’s usually safe to assume 2 V. To get the
LED to shine at maximum brightness, you should choose a current
that’s as close as possible to what the LED can handle. Common
LEDs often have a limit of about 0.02 A. When using values as small
as this, it’s common to write the values in milliamperes (mA). Milli
means one thousandth, so 0.02 A is the same as 20 mA. If you want
the LED to shine brightly while also not pushing it to its limit, you can
choose a current of 15 mA (0.015 A).



                                                                    CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS   49
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


         The voltage the LED needs and the current you want, together
     with the voltage of your battery, are all you need to figure out the
     correct resistance.
         When you have a circuit with a 9 V battery, a resistor, and a stan-
     dard LED, the LED will “grab” the voltage it needs. And the rest of the
     voltage will go across the resistor.
         From the previous section about Ohm’s law, you learned that you
     can find resistance by dividing voltage by current. So to find the
     resistance for your resistor, you need to take the voltage you have
     across the resistor and divide it by the current you want through the
     resistor.
          First, subtract the LED voltage
     (2 V) from the battery voltage (9 V)
                                                         Resistance = 9 V – 2 V
     to get the voltage across the resis-                             0.015 A
     tor. Then divide the result by the
     LED current you want (0.015 A).                                = 7V
         When you enter this into a cal-                              0.015 A
     culator, you should get 467 Ω. That                            = 467 Ω
     means you need a 467 Ω resistor
     to get 15 mA of current flowing
     through the resistor.
         Since the current going through the resistor is the same as the
     current through the LED, it means you get 15 mA through your LED
     too. This also means that it doesn’t matter if you place the resistor
     before or after the LED!
          Resistors come in standard values. Choose a standard value that
     is close enough to your calculations. 467 Ω isn’t a common value, but
     470 Ω is, so that’s a good choice.




50   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl



 Project #7: Light Up an LED Without
 Breaking It
Now let’s power an LED by connecting it to a circuit with a protective
resistor and a 9 V battery. Use a 470 Ω resistor so that you get 15 mA,
as you calculated in the previous section.




                       470 Ω
                                                          9V


Shopping List
   ` A 9 V battery (DigiKey # P687-ND) to power
     the circuit
   ` A battery clip (DigiKey #
     36-233-ND) to connect the
     battery to the circuit
   ` A standard LED (DigiKey #
     754-1264-ND)
   ` A 470 Ω resistor (DigiKey #
     CF12JT470RCT-ND) for limiting
     the current to the LED

Step 1: Check Your Resistor Value
Make sure the resistor you’re using is a 470 Ω resistor. If your resistor
has four bands, the first three color bands should be yellow, purple,
and brown. The last one is usually gold or silver.




                                                                    CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS   51
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


         If your resistor has five bands, the first four color bands should be
     yellow, purple, black, and black. The last one is usually brown.




         You can figure out what other colors mean by looking at the resis-
     tor color codes table in the Handy Resources section at the back of
     the book.

     Step 2: Connect the Resistor and the LED
     First, connect the resistor and the LED by twisting
     either leg of the resistor around the long leg, or anode,
     of the LED.

                            Step 3: Wire the Battery Clip
                            The battery clip has a red wire, which is the posi-
                                tive side of the battery, and a black wire,
                                    which is the negative side. To connect the
                                    battery clip, twist the end of the battery
                                  clip’s black wire around the short leg, or
                             cathode, of the LED. Then twist the red wire
                         around the resistor leg that isn’t connected to the LED.

     Step 4: Let There Be Light!
     Now, plug the battery into the clip—and your LED
     should glow!

     What If the LED
     Doesn’t Work?
     If your LED doesn’t
     turn on, discon-
     nect the battery
     and make sure you’ve
     connected the components
     exactly as I described in Steps 2
52   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


through 4. Having someone else review your wiring can be helpful
too. Ask a friend to look it over.
    If your connections look right and the LED is still dark, double-
check the LED’s orientation. Just about anyone who’s ever built an
electronics project has connected an LED backward at least once.
The long leg is the anode. In this project, the anode should be con-
nected to the positive side of the battery.
   Still not working? There’s a chance your LED is broken. Try grab-
bing another one and go through the steps again!



Meet the Breadboard
So far, you’ve been connecting circuits with tape
or by twisting component legs together, but
this isn’t very practical when a circuit
has more than a few components.
Fortunately, a breadboard
can make connecting
components easier.
Breadboards have
holes that you can stick
component leads into to
create circuits. When you’re done,
you can just unplug all the compo-
nents and reuse them in different projects!

Power Rails
Inside a breadboard, metal plates connect the holes in a certain
pattern. A standard breadboard has two power rails on each side and
two component areas in the middle. We’ll look at the power rails first.
   In the power rails on both sides, the holes in each column are
connected. We’ll typically plug the positive side of our circuit’s power
supply—like the batteries we’ve used so far—into a red column, then
plug the negative side of the power supply into a blue column.

                                                                    CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS   53
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


                                         power rails     Throughout this
                                                    book, I’ll refer to the
                                                    column marked with a
                                                    red line as the positive
                                                    rail and the column
                                                    marked with a blue
                                                    line as the ground
        positive rail                               rail. Why “ground”?
                                                    Because in circuits
                    ground rail                     where there’s just a
     positive connection and a negative connection, the negative connec-
     tion is often called “ground.”

     Component Areas
     In the component areas, all the holes in each row are connected, and
     the columns are not. The left and right component areas are sepa-
     rated so that there’s no connection between them. For example, holes
                                                     A, B, C, D, and E in
                               component area        row 1 are connected,
                                                     and holes F, G, H, I,
                                                     and J in row 1 are
                                                     connected, but holes E
                                                     and F in row 1 are not
                                                     connected.
                                                          To plug a com-
          component area                              ponent into a bread-
                                                      board, push it into
                                                      the hole where you
     want the connection. For example, to connect one leg of a resistor to
     the anode (positive leg) of an LED, you insert the resistor leg and the
     LED anode into two holes on the same row, either in the left or right
     component area.
        If you have two component legs or wires that shouldn’t connect,
     make sure they’re either on different rows or on opposite sides of the
     component area.

54   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl



                                                 connected

                                                               not connected!




Wires to Use on a Breadboard
You can use wires to connect one row on your breadboard with a
different row, but not all wires will work well. The wire must be stiff
enough that you can
                                                          
push it into the hole       
without bending it,                                                
and thick enough to
fit all the way inside
the breadboard hole
without falling out.
    When building
circuits on a bread-
board, single-strand
wires are the best because they have one solid core
inside, instead of many tiny wires wrapped
together. The thickness of the wire you need
depends on your breadboard, but wires
with 0.02- to 0.025-inch diameters
should work. Wire thickness is often
given in units called American Wire
Gauge (AWG). I recommend using wire
that is 22 to 24 AWG. If the wire thick-
ness is in mm2, go for around 0.2 to 0.3 mm2.
You can buy wires that are cut and stripped for use


                                                                    CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS   55
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


                                        with breadboards. Or you can use a wire
                                           cutter to cut and strip wires yourself.
                                         Another option is to use bread-
                                    board jumper wires, which have connec-
                                   tors on each
                end that are easy to connect to
     a breadboard. If you plan to connect a
     lot of circuits on a breadboard (you
     should!), keep a bunch of jumper
     wires on hand to make life easier.



       Project #8: Your First Breadboard
       Circuit
     Let’s connect a simple circuit on a breadboard! Just as in “Project #7:
     Light Up an LED Without Breaking It” on page 51, this circuit lights up
     an LED, but this time we’ll build the circuit on a breadboard. In this
     project, we’re not going to use the power rails on the side because the
     circuit is so simple that it makes more sense just to connect it all on
     the component area.

     Shopping List
         ` A breadboard (DigiKey #
           1738-1326-ND) with
           at least 30 rows
         ` A 9 V battery
           (DigiKey # P687-
           ND) to power
           the circuit
         ` A battery clip
           (DigiKey #
           36-233-ND)
           to connect the
           battery to the circuit

56   CHAPTER 4
     Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


   ` A standard LED (DigiKey #                            1
                                                              A B C D E            F G H I J
                                                                                               1

     754-1264-ND)
   ` A 470 Ω resistor (DigiKey #                          5                                    5

     CF12JT470RCT-ND) to limit
     the current to the LED
                                                         10                                    10


Step 1: Place the Resistor
                                                                                               15
Place one leg of the resistor in row 1
                                                         15


and the other in row 8.

Step 2: Place the LED
Connect the anode (long leg) of the LED to the same row as the
resistor (row 8) but in a different hole. The resistor and LED legs are
now connected because they’re on the same row. Connect the cath-
ode of the LED to row 9.

Step 3: Place the                                                  1
                                                                       A B C D E      F G H I J
                                                                                                    1


Battery Clip                                                      5                                 5

Now you’ll connect the bat-
tery. First, connect the battery                                  10                                10

clip’s red wire at row 1 with                   9V
the resistor. Connect its black                                   15                                15

wire at row 9 with the LED’s
cathode. Plug your battery into                                   20                                20

the clip—and your LED should
light up!                                                         25                                25




What If the Circuit Doesn’t Work?                                 30
                                                                       A B C D E      F G H I J
                                                                                                    30


If your LED doesn’t glow, first disconnect
the battery. Then check whether the short leg of the
LED is connected to the negative side of the battery.




                                                                         CREATING LIGHT WITH LEDS        57
           Electronics for Kids, 2nd Edition (Sample Chapter) © 2/20/26 by Øyvind Nydal Dahl


          Next, make sure the components are connected exactly as
     described. Is the anode of the LED in row 8, alongside the resistor
     leg? Is the red battery wire in the same row as the other resistor leg?
     Is the black battery wire in row 9 with the cathode? Ask someone
     else to have a look at your circuit too. Maybe they can help you find
     the problem.


         NOTE* When you want to make changes to a circuit you’ve built
          on a breadboard, always disconnect the battery first. It’s so easy
          to accidentally connect a component in the wrong place (believe
          me, I know!). Make changes first. Then reconnect the battery.




     What’s Next?
     In this chapter, you learned about the resistor and how useful it is
     for protecting the LED. First, you killed an LED. Then you learned
     to use Ohm’s law to find the right resistance value and light up an
     LED (without breaking it)! You also learned how to build circuits on
     a breadboard. This knowledge will form the foundation of many
     aspects of electronics that you’ll explore throughout this book.
         You also learned how to use a breadboard, which is a useful skill.
     To practice placing circuits on a breadboard, try building one of the
     projects you did earlier in this book without tape. How would you
     re-create “Project #2: Build Your Own Secret Intruder Alarm” on page
     9 on a breadboard?
          In Chapter 5, you’ll learn about two more components: the capac-
     itor and the relay. Then I’ll show you how to build one of my favorite
     circuits—a circuit that blinks a light!




58   CHAPTER 4
