         Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan




                      10
                    SKITTER




A
           s the name suggests, Skitter Bot really likes to get
           around. Using just a single motor and a DPDT switch
           wired as an H-bridge, Skitter’s feet shuffle back and
forth to move it forward. This is perhaps one of the simplest
and most reliable walking-type bots you might ever construct.
It is designed to do only one thing, and it does it very well. In
spite of having a only single purpose, one nice side effect of its
scrub brush feet is that it’ll sweep your floor wherever it goes.
                  Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan


 Tools and Supplies
 êê Continuous-rotation servo motor            êê Bic Classic pen
      with the controller removed              êê A 1½ × 3/8-inch corner brace
 êê A 3 × AA battery holder
                                               êê Drill
 êê Three AA batteries
                                               êê 1/8-inch drill bit
 êê DPDT toggle switch
                                               êê Wire stripper
 êê Four scrub brushes (with long
                                               êê Cutting pliers
      handles)
 êê Small plastic container (mine is           êê Box cutter
      3½ × 2½ × 2 inches)                      êê An assortment of zip ties



 Skitter Overview
 To build Skitter, you’ll first modify a continuous-rotation servo for direct
 drive by removing its controller board (Chapter 4). The next step is to attach
 two scrub brushes to the rear of the servo motor. The motor itself is then
 mounted onto the lid of a plastic container. After that, you’ll attach the
 battery to the plastic container itself and attach the remaining two scrub
 brushes to the front. You’ll fasten the DPDT switch to the lid and then wire
 the switch in an H-bridge configuration to complete the circuit. You’ll
 extend the switch’s lever with a tube from a pen so it can make contact with
 the oscillating scrub brushes. Finally, you’ll insert the batteries and snap the
 lid shut to make the bot go.


 Constructing Skitter
 Step 1. Drill four 1/8-inch holes in each
 end of the servo horn.
 Step 2. Pass two zip ties down
 through the front two holes in the
 servo horn. Next, pass them through
 the two adjacent centermost holes               Step 1




102     HOMEMADE ROBOTS
                Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan

in the corner brace. Then, pass the zip ties through the hanging holes in the
brush handles. Finally, zip-tie everything firmly together.
Step 3. Use the two free holes in the corner brace as a guide for drilling
downward through each of the brushes.




                                            Step 3

Step 2


Step 4. Securely zip-tie the brushes to the corner brace. For extra support,
zip-tie the brush handle mounting ring to the unused back holes of the
servo horn.




Step 4




                                                                          Skitter   103
                  Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan

 Step 5. Center the backside of your servo near one of the short edges of the
 plastic container lid. Trace the outline of the back of the servo and then cut
 out the shape with a box cutter. Finally, pass the motor wires through the
 hole and slide the plastic container lid down over the servo.
 Step 6. Drill 1/8-inch holes in the plastic container lid that line up with the
 servo’s mounting holes.




 Step 5
                                              Step 6


 Step 7. Zip-tie the motor firmly in place, and trim away the excess.




 Step 7




104   HOMEMADE ROBOTS
                 Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan

Step 8. Center the battery holder over the underside of the plastic con-
tainer and use the holder’s mounting holes as a drill guide. Drill two 1/8-inch
holes.
Step 9. Place the battery holder inside the plastic container and fasten the
two items together using nuts and bolts.




Step 8                                       Step 9


Step 10. Take the two remaining scrubbers, measure 1 inch in from the
edge, and make a mark. Drill a 1/8-inch hole down through the handle where
you made this mark.




Step 10




                                                                           Skitter   105
                 Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan

 Step 11. Turn the plastic container upside down. Mark, drill, and zip-tie the
 two remaining scrub brushes to the front of the plastic container such that
 they meet at a 90-degree angle and point evenly downward toward the
 direction of the plastic container opening. In other words, make two even-
 length front legs for your bot.
 Step 12. Drill a ¼-inch centered hole near the other short edge of the plastic
 container lid.




 Step 11                                     Step 12


 Step 13. Pass the DPDT switch through the hole so that the shaft is pointing
 at the scrubber legs and then fasten the switch on with a nut.




 Step 13




106    HOMEMADE ROBOTS
                Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan

Step 14. Wire together the opposite corners of the DPDT switch. Solder the
red battery wire to one of the center DPDT switch pins and the black bat-
tery wire to the other.
    Turn the switch so that there are only two pins facing you (as opposed
to three). Solder the black motor wire to the DPDT pin closest to you on the
right. Solder the red motor wire to the other pin on the left.




Step 14




êêinformation
         Refer to “H-Bridges” on page XX in Chapter 3 for more
      NOTE
              on how to change the direction that a motor is spin-
      ning using a switch.



Step 15. Take apart the Bic pen and
cut about 1½ inches from the end of
the pen tube to use it as an extender
for the switch’s lever.



                                            Step 15




                                                                          Skitter   107
                     Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan

 Step 16. Make certain the switch is
 positioned between the two scrub-
 bers. Fill the pen cap with hot glue
 and, using pliers, quickly slide it
 onto the switch’s shaft. Hold the hot
 tube in place until it begins to set. Be
 careful not to push it on too far; oth-
 erwise, you could get hot glue inside
 the switch, which could prevent it
 from working.
 Step 17. Put some batteries into the     Step 16
 holder, and the legs will start to move.




 Step 17




  êêlegs oscillate
           If, when you power up the bot, the switch isn’t making the
           NOTE
                   back and forth, remove the batteries. Then, simply
           rotate the switch 180 degrees in its mounting hole. It should now
           work perfectly when you reinsert the batteries.




108    HOMEMADE ROBOTS
                 Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan

Step 18. Quickly close the plastic container and let the bot go free.




Step 18




êêAppendixBeAsure
          NOTE    to remove the batteries to turn the bot off. See
              for instructions on adding a power switch.




                                                                           Skitter   109
Homemade Robots (SampleChapter) © 2021 by Randy Sarafan
