13
Burglar Detector
with Photo
Capture
This proj ect will teach
you to use th e Raspberry
Pi Camera Modu le v2, which,
along with th e PIR motion
sensor, wi ll detect an d
photograph trespassers.
Wh en th e motion sensor
detects movement, it
triggers an event that
takes a photo so you know
who was in you r house
while you were out.
Cost: $ $ 	Ti me : 4 5 m i n u tes




Pa r t s R e q u i r e d
Raspberr y Pi
Breadboard
Raspberr y Pi Camera Module v2
PI R m o t i o n s e n s o r H C - S R 5 0 1
Pushbutton
Jumper wires
                           I nt r o d u cin g t h e Ra s p b e r r y Pi
                           Camera Module v2
                           The Raspberry Pi Camera Module v2, shown in Figure 13-1, features
                           an 8 MP Sony IMX219 image sensor with a fixed-focus lens. It’s
                           capable of 3280×2464 pixel static images and supports video with
                           resolutions of 1080p at 30 frames, 720p at 60 frames, and 640×480
                           at 90 frames—all of which means it’s a pretty good camera for its size!
                           You’ll just use the static image capabilities in this project.

      Figure 13-1:
 Raspberry Pi Camera
             Module v2




                               This camera is compatible with all Raspberry Pi models—1, 2, 3,
                           and zero—and comes with a 15 cm ribbon cable that makes it easy
                           to connect to the CSI port on the Raspberry Pi, designed to interface
                           with cameras. If you want your camera to reach farther than 15 cm
                           from your Pi, you should be able to find and purchase longer cables.
                               The Raspberry Pi Camera Module v2 is one of the most popular
                           Raspberry Pi add-ons because it gives users an affordable way to
                           take still photographs and record video in full HD. One interesting
                           example of a Camera Module v2 project comes from the Naturebytes
                           community, which provides kits to remotely capture wildlife photos.
                           Figure 13-2 shows the wildlife camera in action.

      Figure 13-2:
  Raspberry Pi camera
with PIR motion sensor
pointed at a bird feeder




                                         1 64 • p roj ec t 1 3
     The Naturebytes kit is also equipped with a PIR motion sensor,
so if a bird perches on the feeder in Figure 13-2, it will trigger the
camera to take a photo of the bird. You’ll use the same principles for
this project’s burglar detector.


B u ildin g t h e B u r g la r D e t e cto r
The burglar detector consists of a PIR motion sensor, a pushbutton,
and a camera module you’ll connect to your Pi. You’ll use the built-in
picamera library, which makes it simple to control the camera.

Enabling the Camera
You need to enable your Pi’s camera software before you can use the
camera module. In the desktop environment, go to the main menu
and select Preferences4Raspberry Pi Configuration. You should
see a window like the one in Figure 13-3.

                                                                         Figure 13-3:
                                                                         Enabling the camera
                                                                         software




    Select Enabled on the Camera row, then click OK, and you’re
ready to go.

Connecting the Camera
With the camera software enabled, shut down your Pi and then con-
nect the camera to the CSI port. Make sure the camera is connected
with the blue letters facing up and oriented as shown in Figure 13-4.
Then start up your Pi again.




                                           1 65 • p roj ec t 1 3
       Figure 13-4:
          Connecting the
 Raspberry Pi camera to
              the CSI port




                                W i r in g t h e C i r c u it
                    Note        With the camera connected, follow these instructions to wire the rest
 Be careful when moving         of the circuit, using Figure 13-5 as a reference.
  the camera. The ribbon
   is very fragile, and if it   1.   Connect a GND pin to the breadboard GND rails.
 touches the GPIOs, they
                                2.   Insert a pushbutton into the breadboard so that it straddles the
may permanently damage
  your camera. Try using
                                     center divide. Connect one lead to GND and the other lead on
  some modeling clay or              the same side of the button to GPIO 2.
 sticky tack to secure the      3.   Wire the PIR motion sensor with the connections shown in the
                   camera.
                                     following table.

                                         P IR m o t i o n s e n s o r        R a s pb e r r y P i

                                                    GND                            GND
                                                    OUT                           GPIO 4
                                                    VCC                             5V




                                                1 6 6 • p roj ec t 1 3
                                                                          Figure 13-5:
                                                                          The burglar detector circuit




W r itin g t h e Sc r i p t
To control the camera, you’ll use the built-in picamera library. It’s
a very straightforward library, so this script will be a piece of cake.
Here’s an overview of what the code should do:

1.   Initialize the camera.
2.   Take a photo when the PIR motion sensor detects movement.
3.   Save the photos in your Desktop folder.
4.   Name the photos incrementally so you know what order they were
     taken in—for example, image_1.jpg, image_2.jpg, and so on.
5.   Stop the camera when the pushbutton is pressed. If you don’t
     include this feature, you won’t be able to exit the camera preview
     that pops up on your screen.


Entering the Script
Go to your Projects folder and create a new folder called Cameras.        Note
Then open Python 3 (IDLE) and go to File4New to create a new              You can’t name any of your

script called burglar_detector.py, and copy the following code into       files picamera.py because
                                                                          picamera is a Python
it (remember that you can download all the scripts at https://www.
                                                                          library name and
nostarch.com/RaspberryPiProject/ ).                                       cannot be used.




                                             1 67 • p roj ec t 1 3
    #import the necessary libraries
 from gpiozero import Button, MotionSensor
    from picamera import PiCamera
    from time import sleep
    from signal import pause

  #create objects that refer to a button,
  #a motion, sensor, and the PiCamera
 button = Button(2)
  pir = MotionSensor(4)
  camera = PiCamera()

  #start the camera
  camera.rotation = 180
 camera.start_preview()

    #create image names
 i = 0

    #stop the camera when the pushbutton is pressed
 def stop_camera():
        camera.stop_preview()
        #exit the program
        exit()

    #take a photo when motion is detected
 def take_photo():
        global i
        i = i + 1
        camera.capture('/home/pi/Desktop/image_%s.jpg' % i)
        print('A photo has been taken')
       sleep(10)

    #assign a function that runs when the button is pressed
 button.when_pressed = stop_camera
    #assign a function that runs when motion is detected
 pir.when_motion = take_photo

    pause()


         First you import the libraries you need ; as we’ve said, the pro-
    gram uses the picamera library to control the camera. You should be
    familiar with all the other modules used here from previous projects.
    Then you create objects to refer to the pushbutton, the PIR motion
    sensor, and the camera , and initialize the camera with camera​
    .start_preview() . Depending on how your camera is oriented,
    you might also need to rotate it 180 degrees with camera.rotation =
    180 so that it doesn’t take the photos upside down. If your image is




                  1 6 8 • p roj ec t 1 3
upside down when you test this code, go back and set the rotation
to 0 or comment out this line.
     Next, you initialize an i variable that starts at 0 . The take_
photo() function, defined at , will use this variable to count and
number the images, incrementing the number in the filename by one
with each picture taken.
     You then define the stop_camera() function that stops the cam-
era with the camera.stop_preview() method . At , you define the
take_photo() function we just mentioned, which takes a photo. For
this, you use the camera.capture() method, specifying the direc-
tory you want to save the image to inside the parentheses. In this
case, we’re saving the images in the Desktop folder and naming
the images image_%s.jpg, where %s is replaced with the number we
incremented earlier in i. If you want to save your files to a different
folder, replace this directory with the path to your chosen folder.
     You then impose a 10-second delay , meaning the camera
takes photos at 10-second intervals for as long as the PIR sensor
detects movement. Feel free to increase or decrease the delay time,
but be careful to not overload the Pi with tons of images by making
the delay time too small.
     At , you define the behavior to trigger the stop_camera() func-
tion when you press the pushbutton. This function stops the camera
preview and exits the program. The exit() function pops up a window
asking if you want to close the program; to close it, just click OK.
Finally, you tell the camera to take a photo by triggering the take_
photo() function when motion is detected .

Running the Script
Press F5 or go to Run4Run Module to run the script. While the
script is running, you should see a preview of what the camera sees
on your screen. To shut down the camera preview, press the push-
button and click OK in the window that pops up.
     Congratulations! Your burglar detector is ready to catch some
burglars. Place the burglar detector in a strategic place and come
back later to check any saved photos. Figure 13-6 shows a photo
taken by our burglar detector, catching someone stealing a computer
from our lab.




                                           1 69 • p roj ec t 1 3
    Figure 13-6:
Picture taken with the
     burglar detector




                         Ta k in g I t F u r t h e r
                         As you’ve seen, projects with cameras are fun! Here’s an idea on
                         how to improve your security system: redesign your project so that,
                         when the sensor detects motion, the Raspberry Pi takes a photo,
                         sends you an email notification, and sounds an alarm. You should
                         already know how to do all of this using the skills you’ve learned from
                         Projects 9–12.




                                       170 • p roj ec t 1 3
