 The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn




               DEPLOYING CONTAINERS TO
                                        7
                     KUBERNETES



                    We’re now ready to begin running con­
                   tainers on our working Kubernetes cluster.
                 Because Kubernetes has a declarative API,
               we’ll create various kinds of resources to run
        them, and we’ll monitor the cluster to see what Kuber­
        netes does for each type of resource.
             Different containers have different use cases. Some might require mul­
        tiple identical instances with autoscaling to perform well under load. Other
        containers might exist solely to run a one­time command. Still others may
        require a fixed ordering to enable selecting a single primary instance and
        providing controlled failover to a secondary instance. Kubernetes provides
        different controller resource types for each of those use cases. We’ll look at
        each in turn, but we’ll begin with the most fundamental of them, the Pod,
        which is utilized by all of those use cases.


Pods
        A Pod is the most basic resource in Kubernetes and is how we run contain­
        ers. Each Pod can have one or more containers within it. The Pod is used to
       The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                   provide the process isolation we saw in Chapter 2. Linux kernel namespaces
                   are used at the Pod and the container level:
                       mntMount points: each container has its own root filesystem; other
                       mounts are available to all containers in the Pod.
                       uts   Unix time sharing: isolated at the Pod level.
                       ipc   Interprocess communication: isolated at the Pod level.
                       pid   Process identifiers: isolated at the container level.
                       net   Network: isolated at the Pod level.
                        The biggest advantage of this approach is that multiple containers can
                   act like processes on the same virtual host, using the localhost address to
                   communicate, while still being based on separate container images.


                   Deploying a Pod
                   To get started, let’s create a Pod directly. Unlike the previous chapter, in
                   which we used kubectl run to have the Pod specification created for us, we’ll
                   specify it directly using YAML so that we have complete control over the Pod
                   and to prepare us for using controllers to create Pods, providing scalability
                   and failover.

      NOTE         The example repository for this book is at https://github.com/book­of
                   ­kubernetes/examples. See “Running Examples” on page xx for details on
                   getting set up.
                       The automation script for this chapter does a full cluster install with
                   three nodes that run the control plane and regular applications, providing
                   the smallest possible highly available cluster for testing. The automation also
                   creates some YAML files for Kubernetes resources. Here’s a basic YAML
                   resource to create a Pod running NGINX:

 nginx-pod.yaml ---
                apiVersion: v1
                kind: Pod
                metadata:
                  name: nginx
                spec:
                  containers:
                  - name: nginx
                    image: nginx

                        Pods are part of the core Kubernetes API, so we just specify a version
                   number of v1 for the apiVersion. Specifying Pod as the kind tells Kubernetes
                   exactly what resource we’re creating in the API group. We will see these
                   fields in all of our Kubernetes resources.



112    Chapter 7
The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
             The metadata field has many uses. For the Pod, we just need to provide
       the one required field of name. We don’t specify the namespace in the meta­
       data, so by default this Pod will end up in the default Namespace.
             The remaining field, spec, tells Kubernetes everything it needs to know
       to run this Pod. For now we are providing the minimal information, which
       is a list of containers to run, but many other options are available. In this
       case, we have only one container, so we provide just the name and container
       image Kubernetes should use.
             Let’s add this Pod to the cluster. The automation added files to /opt, so
       we can do it from host01 as follows:

       root@host01:~# kubectl apply -f /opt/nginx-pod.yaml
       pod/nginx created

           In Listing 7­1, we can check the Pod’s status.

       root@host01:~# kubectl get pods -o wide
       NAME    READY STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE     IP                       NODE   ...
       nginx 1/1       Running 0            2m26s   172.31.25.202           host03 ...

       Listing 7-1: Status of NGINX
            It can take some time before the Pod shows Running, especially if you just
       set up your Kubernetes cluster and it’s still busy deploying core components.
       Keep trying this kubectl command to check the status.
            Instead of typing the kubectl command multiple times, you can also use
       watch. The watch command is a great way to observe changes in your cluster
       over time. Just add watch in front of your command, and it will be run for
       you every two seconds.
            We added -o wide to the command to see the IP address and node as­
       signment for this Pod. Kubernetes manages that for us. In this case, the
       Pod was scheduled on host03, so we need to go there to see the running
       container:

       root@host03:~# crictl pods --name nginx
       POD ID         CREATED         STATE NAME    NAMESPACE ...
       9f1d6e0207d7e 19 minutes ago Ready nginx     default   ...

           Run this command on whatever host your NGINX Pod is on.
           If we collect the Pod ID, we can see the container as well:

       root@host03:~# POD_ID=$(crictl pods -q --name nginx)
       root@host03:~# crictl ps --pod $POD_ID
       CONTAINER      IMAGE          CREATED         STATE         NAME       ...
       9da09b3671418 4cdc5dd7eaadf 20 minutes ago Running          nginx      ...

           This output looks very similar to the output from kubectl get in List­
       ing 7­1, which is not surprising given that our cluster gets that information
       from the kubelet service running on this node, which in turn uses the same
       Container Runtime Interface (CRI) API that crictl is also using to talk to the
       container engine.

                                                             Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   113
       The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                   Pod Details and Logging
                   The ability to use crictl with the underlying container engine to explore a
                   container running in the cluster is valuable, but it does require us to connect
                   to the specific host running the container. Much of the time, we can avoid
                   that by using kubectl commands to inspect Pods from anywhere by connect­
                   ing to our cluster’s API server. Let’s move back to host01 and explore the
                   NGINX Pod further.
                        In Chapter 6, we saw how we could use kubectl describe to see the status
                   and event log for a cluster node. We can use the same command to see the
                   status and configuration details of other Kubernetes resources. Here’s the
                   event log for our NGINX Pod:

                   root@host01:~# kubectl describe pod nginx
                   Name:         nginx
                   Namespace: ¶ default
                   ...
                   Containers:
                     nginx:
                       Container ID: containerd://9da09b3671418...
                   ...
                   · Type    Reason     Age From               Message
                     ----    ------     ---- ----              -------
                     Normal Scheduled 22m default-scheduler Successfully assigned ...
                     Normal Pulling     22m kubelet            Pulling image "nginx"
                     Normal Pulled      21m kubelet            Successfully pulled image ...
                     Normal Created     21m kubelet            Created container nginx
                     Normal Started     21m kubelet            Started container nginx

                       We can use kubectl describe with many different Kubernetes resources,
                   so we first tell kubectl that we are interested in a Pod and provide the name.
                   Because we didn’t specify a Namespace, Kubernetes will look for this Pod in
                   the default Namespace ¶.

      NOTE         We use the default Namespace for most of the examples in this book to save typing,
                   but it’s a good practice to use multiple Namespaces to keep applications separate,
                   both to avoid naming conflicts and to manage access control. We look at Name­
                   spaces in more detail in Chapter 11.
                        The kubectl describe command output provides an event log ·, which is
                   the first place to look for issues when we have problems starting a container.
                        Kubernetes takes a few steps when deploying a container. First, it needs
                   to schedule it onto a node, which requires that node to be available with suf­
                   ficient resources. Then, control passes to kubelet on that node, which has to
                   interact with the container engine to pull the image, create a container, and
                   start it.




114    Chapter 7
 The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
            After the container is started, kubelet collects the standard out and stan­
        dard error. We can view this output by using the kubectl logs command:

        root@host01:~# kubectl logs nginx
        ...
        2021/07/13 22:37:03 [notice] 1#1: start worker processes
        2021/07/13 22:37:03 [notice] 1#1: start worker process 33
        2021/07/13 22:37:03 [notice] 1#1: start worker process 34

            The kubectl logs command always refers to a Pod because Pods are the
        basic resource used to run containers, and our Pod has only one container,
        so we can just specify the name of the Pod as a single parameter to kubectl
        logs. As before, Kubernetes will look in the default Namespace because we
        didn’t specify the Namespace.
            The container output is available even if the container has exited, so the
        kubectl logs command is the place to look if a container is pulled and started
        successfully but then crashes. Of course, we have to hope that the container
        printed a log message explaining why it crashed. In Chapter 10, we look at
        what to do if we can’t get a container going and don’t have any log messages.
            We’re done with the NGINX Pod, so let’s clean it up:

        root@host01:~# kubectl delete -f /opt/nginx-pod.yaml
        pod "nginx" deleted

             We can use the same YAML configuration file to delete the Pod, which
        is convenient when we have multiple Kubernetes resources defined in a sin­
        gle file, as a single command will delete all of them. The kubectl command
        uses the name of each resource defined in the file to perform the delete.


Deployments
        To run a container, we need a Pod, but that doesn’t mean we generally want
        to create the Pod directly. When we create a Pod directly, we don’t get all of
        the scalability and failover that Kubernetes offers, because Kubernetes will
        run only one instance of the Pod. This Pod will be allocated to a node only
        on creation, with no re­allocation even if the node fails.
             To get scalability and failover, we instead need to create a controller to
        manage the Pod for us. We’ll look at multiple controllers that can run Pods,
        but let’s start with the most common: the Deployment.


        Creating a Deployment
        A Deployment manages one or more identical Kubernetes Pods. When we
        create a Deployment, we provide a Pod template. The Deployment then cre­
        ates Pods matching that template with the help of a ReplicaSet.




                                                           Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   115
      The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn

                                      DEPLOYMENTS AND REPLICASETS

                       Kubernetes has evolved its controller resources over time. The first type of con-
                       troller, the ReplicationController, provided only basic functionality. It was re-
                       placed by the ReplicaSet, which has improvements in how it identifies which
                       Pods to manage.
                       Part of the reason to replace ReplicationControllers with ReplicaSets is that
                       ReplicationControllers were becoming more and more complicated, making the
                       code difficult to maintain. The new approach splits up controller responsibility
                       between ReplicaSets and Deployments. ReplicaSets are responsible for basic
                       Pod management, including monitoring Pod status and performing failover.
                       Deployments are responsible for tracking changes to the Pod template caused
                       by configuration changes or container image updates. Deployments and
                       ReplicaSets work together, but the Deployment creates its own ReplicaSet, so
                       we usually need to interact only with Deployments. For this reason, I use the
                       term Deployment generically to refer to features provided by the ReplicaSet,
                       such as monitoring Pods to provide the requested number of replicas.



                       Here’s the YAML file we’ll use to create an NGINX Deployment:

nginx-deploy.yaml ---
                  kind: Deployment
                  apiVersion: apps/v1
                  metadata:
                 ¶ name: nginx
                  spec:
                    replicas: 3
                    selector:
                      matchLabels:
                        app: nginx
                    template:
                      metadata:
                      · labels:
                          app: nginx
                   ¸ spec:
                        containers:
                        - name: nginx
                          image: nginx
                        ¹ resources:
                            requests:
                              cpu: "100m"

                       Deployments are in the apps API group, so we specify apps/v1 for
                   apiVersion. Like every Kubernetes resource, we need to provide a unique
                   name ¶ to keep this Deployment separate from any others we might create.
                        The Deployment specification has a few important fields, so let’s look
                   at them in detail. The replicas field tells Kubernetes how many identical in­
                   stances of the Pod we want. Kubernetes will work to keep this many Pods

116    Chapter 7
The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
       running. The next field, selector, is used to enable the Deployment to find
       its Pods. The content of matchLabels must exactly match the content in the
       template.metadata.labels field ·, or Kubernetes will reject the Deployment.
            Finally, the content of template.spec ¸ will be used as the spec for any
       Pods created by this Deployment. The fields here can include any configu­
       ration we can provide for a Pod. This configuration matches nginx­pod.yaml
       that we looked at earlier except that we add a CPU resource request ¹ so
       that we can configure autoscaling later on.
            Let’s create our Deployment from this YAML resource file:

       root@host01:~# kubectl apply -f /opt/nginx-deploy.yaml
       deployment.apps/nginx created

           We can track the status of the Deployment with kubectl get:

       root@host01:~# kubectl get deployment nginx
       NAME    READY UP-TO-DATE     AVAILABLE AGE
       nginx 3/3       3            3           4s

           When the Deployment is fully up, it will report that it has three replicas
       ready and available, which means that we now have three separate NGINX
       Pods managed by this Deployment:

       root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
       NAME                     READY    STATUS    RESTARTS       AGE
       nginx-6799fc88d8-6vn44 1/1        Running   0              18s
       nginx-6799fc88d8-dcwx5 1/1        Running   0              18s
       nginx-6799fc88d8-sh8qs 1/1        Running   0              18s

            The name of each Pod begins with the name of the Deployment. Ku­
       bernetes adds some random characters to build the name of the ReplicaSet,
       followed by more random characters so that each Pod has a unique name.
       We don’t need to create or manage the ReplicaSet directly, but we can use
       kubectl get to see it:

       root@host01:~# kubectl get replicasets
       NAME               DESIRED CURRENT     READY    AGE
       nginx-6799fc88d8 3           3         3        30s

           Although we generally interact only with Deployments, it is important
       to know about the ReplicaSet, as some specific errors encountered when
       creating Pods are only reported in the ReplicaSet event log.
           The nginx prefix on the ReplicaSet and Pod names are purely for con­
       venience. The Deployment does not use names to match itself to Pods. In­
       stead, it uses its selector to match the labels on the Pod. We can see these
       labels if we run kubectl describe on one of the three Pods:

       root@host01:~# kubectl describe pod nginx-6799fc88d8-6vn44
       Name:         nginx-6799fc88d8-6vn44
       Namespace:    default

                                                              Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   117
      The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                  ...
                  Labels:       app=nginx
                  ...

                      This matches the Deployment’s selector:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl describe deployment nginx
                  Name:                   nginx
                  Namespace:              default
                  ...
                  Selector:               app=nginx
                  ...

                      The Deployment queries the API server to identify Pods matching its se­
                  lector. Whereas the Deployment uses the programmatic API, the kubectl get
                  command in the following example generates a similar API server query,
                  giving us an opportunity to see how that works:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl get all -l app=nginx
                  NAME                     READY STATUS      RESTARTS      AGE
                  nginx-6799fc88d8-6vn44 1/1       Running 0               69s
                  nginx-6799fc88d8-dcwx5 1/1       Running 0               69s
                  nginx-6799fc88d8-sh8qs 1/1       Running 0               69s

                  NAME                                DESIRED    CURRENT   READY   AGE
                  replicaset.apps/nginx-6799fc88d8    3          3         3       69s

                       Using kubectl get all in this case allows us to list multiple different kinds
                  of resources as long as they match the selector. As a result, we see not only
                  the three Pods but also the ReplicaSet that was created by the Deployment
                  to manage those Pods.
                       It may seem strange that the Deployment uses a selector rather than just
                  tracking the Pods it created. However, this design makes it easier for Kuber­
                  netes to be self­healing. At any time, a Kubernetes node might go offline, or
                  we might have a network split, during which some control nodes lose their
                  connection to the cluster. If a node comes back online, or the cluster needs
                  to recombine after a network split, Kubernetes must be able to look at the
                  current state of all of the running Pods and figure out what changes are re­
                  quired to achieve the desired state. This might mean that a Deployment that
                  started an additional Pod as the result of a node disconnection would need
                  to shut down a Pod when that node reconnects so that the cluster can main­
                  tain the appropriate number of replicas. Using a selector avoids the need for
                  the Deployment to remember all the Pods it has ever created, even Pods on
                  failed nodes.




118   Chapter 7
The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
       Monitoring and Scaling
       Because the Deployment is monitoring its Pods to make sure we have the
       correct number of replicas, we can delete a Pod, and it will be automatically
       re­created:

       root@host01:~# kubectl delete pod nginx-6799fc88d8-6vn44
       pod "nginx-6799fc88d8-6vn44" deleted
       root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
       NAME                     READY STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
       nginx-6799fc88d8-dcwx5 1/1       Running 0            3m52s
       nginx-6799fc88d8-dtddk 1/1       Running 0          ¶ 14s
       nginx-6799fc88d8-sh8qs 1/1       Running 0            3m52s

           As soon as the old Pod is deleted, the Deployment created a new Pod ¶.
       Similarly, if we change the number of replicas for the Deployment, Pods are
       automatically updated. Let’s add another replica:

       root@host01:~# kubectl scale --replicas=4 deployment nginx
       deployment.apps/nginx scaled
       root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
       NAME                     READY STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
       nginx-6799fc88d8-dcwx5 1/1       Running 0            8m22s
       nginx-6799fc88d8-dtddk 1/1       Running 0            4m44s
       nginx-6799fc88d8-kk7r6 1/1       Running 0          ¶ 5s
       nginx-6799fc88d8-sh8qs 1/1       Running 0            8m22s

            The first command sets the number of replicas to four. As a result, Ku­
       bernetes needs to start a new identical Pod to meet the number we requested
       ¶. We can scale the Deployment by updating the YAML file and re­running
       kubectl apply, or we can use the kubectl scale command to edit the Deploy­
       ment directly. Either way, this is a declarative approach; we are updating
       the Deployment’s resource declaration; Kubernetes then updates the actual
       state of the cluster to match.
            Similarly, scaling the Deployment down causes Pods to be automatically
       deleted:

       root@host01:~# kubectl scale --replicas=2 deployment nginx
       deployment.apps/nginx scaled
       root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
       NAME                     READY STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
       nginx-6799fc88d8-dcwx5 1/1       Running 0            10m
       nginx-6799fc88d8-sh8qs 1/1       Running 0            10m

           When we scale down, Kubernetes selects two Pods to terminate. These
       Pods take a moment to finish shutting down, at which point we have only
       two NGINX Pods running.




                                                          Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   119
      The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                  Autoscaling
                  For an application that is receiving real requests from users, we would choose
                  the number of replicas necessary to provide a quality application, while scal­
                  ing down when possible to reduce the amount of resources used by our ap­
                  plication. Of course, the load on our application is constantly changing, and
                  it would be tedious to monitor each component of our application continu­
                  ally to scale it independently. Instead, we can have the cluster perform the
                  monitoring and scaling for us using a HorizontalPodAutoscaler. The term hor­
                  izontal in this case just refers to the fact that the autoscaler can update the
                  number of replicas of the same Pod managed by a controller.
                       To configure autoscaling, we create a new resource with a reference to
                  our Deployment. The cluster then monitors resources used by the Pods and
                  reconfigures the Deployment as needed. We could add a HorizontalPod­
                  Autoscaler to our Deployment using the kubectl autoscale command, but
                  using a YAML resource file so that we can keep the autoscale configuration
                  under version control is better. Here’s the YAML file:

nginx-scaler.yaml ---
                ¶ apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
                  kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
                  metadata:
                    name: nginx
                    labels:
                      app: nginx
                  spec:
                 · scaleTargetRef:
                      apiVersion: apps/v1
                      kind: Deployment
                      name: nginx
                 ¸ minReplicas: 1
                    maxReplicas: 10
                    metrics:
                      - type: Resource
                        resource:
                          name: cpu
                          target:
                             type: Utilization
                             averageUtilization: ¹ 50

                       In the metadata field, we add the label app: nginx. This does not change
                  the behavior of the resource; its only purpose is to ensure that this resource
                  shows up if we use an app=nginx label selector in a kubectl get command. This
                  style of tagging the components of an application with consistent metadata
                  is a good practice to help others understand what resources go together and
                  to make debugging easier.




120   Chapter 7
The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
            This YAML configuration uses version 2 of the autoscaler configuration
       ¶. Providing new versions of API resource groups is how Kubernetes accom­
       modates future capability without losing any of its backward compatibility.
       Generally, alpha and beta versions are released for new resource groups be­
       fore the final configuration is released, and there is at least one version of
       overlap between the beta version and the final release to enable seamless
       upgrades.
            Version 2 of the autoscaler supports multiple resources. Each resource
       is used to calculate a vote on the desired number of Pods, and the largest
       number wins. Adding support for multiple resources requires a change in
       the YAML layout, which is a common reason for the Kubernetes maintainers
       to create a new resource version.
            We specify our NGINX Deployment · as the target for the autoscaler
       using its API resource group, kind, and name, which is enough to uniquely
       identify any resource in a Kubernetes cluster. We then tell the autoscaler to
       monitor the CPU utilization of the Pods that belong to the Deployment ¹.
       The autoscaler will work to keep average CPU utilization by the Pods close to
       50 percent over the long run, scaling up or down as necessary. However, the
       number of replicas will never go beyond the range we specify ¸.
            Let’s create our autoscaler using this configuration:

       root@host01:~# kubectl apply -f /opt/nginx-scaler.yaml
       horizontalpodautoscaler.autoscaling/nginx created

           We can query the cluster to see that it was created:

       root@host01:~# kubectl get hpa
       NAME    REFERENCE          TARGETS   MINPODS   MAXPODS         REPLICAS          AGE
       nginx Deployment/nginx     0%/50%    1         10              3                 96s

            The output shows the autoscaler’s target reference, the current and de­
       sired resource utilization, and the maximum, minimum, and current num­
       ber of replicas.
            We use hpa as an abbreviation for horizontalpodautoscaler. Kubernetes
       allows us to use either singular or plural names and provides abbreviations
       for most of its resources to save typing. For example, we can type deploy for
       deployment and even po for pods. Every extra keystroke counts!
            The autoscaler uses CPU utilization data that the kubelet is already col­
       lecting from the container engine. This data is centralized by the metrics
       server we installed as a cluster add­on. Without that cluster add­on, there
       would be no utilization data, and the autoscaler would not make any changes
       to the Deployment. In this case, because we’re not really using our NGINX
       server instances, they aren’t consuming any CPU, and the Deployment is
       scaled down to a single Pod, the minimum we specified:

       root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
       NAME                     READY STATUS      RESTARTS       AGE
       nginx-6799fc88d8-dcwx5 1/1      Running    0              15m



                                                             Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   121
       The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                        The autoscaler has calculated that only one Pod is needed and has scaled
                   the Deployment to match. The Deployment then selected a Pod to terminate
                   to reach the desired scale.
                        For accuracy, the autoscaler will not use CPU data from the Pod if it re­
                   cently started running, and it has logic to prevent it from scaling up or down
                   too often, so if you ran through these examples very quickly you might need
                   to wait a few minutes before you see it scale.
                        We explore Kubernetes resource utilization metrics in more detail when
                   we look at limiting resource usage in Chapter 14.


      Other Controllers
                   Deployments are the most generic and commonly used controller, but Ku­
                   bernetes has some other useful options. In this section, we explore Jobs and
                   CronJobs, StatefulSets, and DaemonSets.


                   Jobs and CronJobs
                   Deployments are great for application components because we usually want
                   one or more instances to stay running indefinitely. However, for cases for
                   which we need to run a command, either once or on a schedule, we can use
                   a Job. The primary difference is a Deployment ensures that any container
                   that stops running is restarted, whereas a Job can check the exit code of the
                   main process and restart only if the exit code is non­zero, indicating failure.
                       A Job definition looks very similar to a Deployment:

  sleep-job.yaml ---
                 apiVersion: batch/v1
                 kind: Job
                 metadata:
                   name: sleep
                 spec:
                   template:
                     spec:
                       containers:
                       - name: sleep
                         image: busybox
                         command:
                           - "/bin/sleep"
                           - "30"
                       restartPolicy: OnFailure

                       The restartPolicy can be set to OnFailure, in which case the container will
                   be restarted for a non­zero exit code, or to Never, in which case the Job will
                   be completed when the container exits regardless of the exit code.
                       We can create and view the Job and the Pod it has created:



122    Chapter 7
       The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn

                  root@host01:~# kubectl apply -f /opt/sleep-job.yaml
                  job.batch/sleep created
                  root@host01:~# kubectl get job
                  NAME    COMPLETIONS DURATION     AGE
                  sleep 0/1             3s         3s
                  root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
                  NAME                     READY STATUS      RESTARTS        AGE
                  ...
                  sleep-fgcnz              1/1     Running   0               10s

                       The Job has created a Pod per the specification provided in the YAML
                  file. The Job reflects 0/1 completions because it is waiting for its Pod to exit
                  successfully.
                       When the Pod has been running for 30 seconds, it exits with a code of
                  zero, indicating success, and the Job and Pod status are updated accordingly:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl get jobs
                  NAME    COMPLETIONS   DURATION      AGE
                  sleep 1/1             31s           40s
                  root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
                  NAME                      READY     STATUS      RESTARTS     AGE
                  nginx-65db7cf9c9-2wcng 1/1          Running     0            31m
                  sleep-fgcnz               0/1       Completed   0            43s

                      The Pod is still available, which means that we could review its logs if de­
                  sired, but it shows a status of Completed, so Kubernetes will not try to restart
                  the exited container.
                      A CronJob is a controller that creates Jobs on a schedule. For example,
                  we could set up our sleep Job to run once per day:

sleep-cronjob.yaml ---
                   apiVersion: batch/v1
                   kind: CronJob
                   metadata:
                     name: sleep
                   spec:
                  ¶ schedule: "0 3 * * *"
                  · jobTemplate:
                     spec:
                       template:
                         spec:
                           containers:
                             - name: sleep
                               image: busybox
                               command:
                                 - "/bin/sleep"
                                 - "30"
                           restartPolicy: OnFailure

                                                                        Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   123
      The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                      The entire contents of the Job specification are embedded inside the
                  jobTemplate field ·. To this, we add a schedule ¶ that follows the standard
                  format for the Unix cron command. In this case, 0 3 * * * indicates that a
                  Job should be created at 3:00 AM every day.
                      One of Kubernetes’ design principles is that anything could go down at
                  any time. For a CronJob, if the cluster has an issue during the time the Job
                  would be scheduled, the Job might not be scheduled, or it might be sched­
                  uled twice, this means that you should take care to write Jobs in an idempo­
                  tent way so that they can handle missing or duplicated scheduling.
                      If we create this CronJob

                  root@host01:~# kubectl apply -f /opt/sleep-cronjob.yaml
                  cronjob.batch/sleep created

                  it now exists in the cluster, but it does not immediately create a Job or a Pod:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl get jobs
                  NAME    COMPLETIONS   DURATION    AGE
                  sleep 1/1             31s         2m32s
                  root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
                  NAME                      READY   STATUS      RESTARTS    AGE
                  nginx-65db7cf9c9-2wcng 1/1        Running     0           33m
                  sleep-fgcnz               0/1     Completed   0           2m23s

                       Instead, the CronJob will create a new Job each time its schedule is
                  triggered.


                  StatefulSets
                  So far, we’ve been looking at controllers that create identical Pods. With
                  both Deployments and Jobs, we don’t really care which Pod is which, or
                  where it is deployed, as long as we run enough instances at the right time.
                  However, that doesn’t always match the behavior we want. For example,
                  even though a Deployment can create Pods with persistent storage, the stor­
                  age must either be brand new for each new Pod, or the same storage must
                  be shared across all Pods. That doesn’t align well with a “primary and sec­
                  ondary” architecture such as a database. For those cases, we want specific
                  storage to be attached to specific Pods.
                      At the same time, because Pods can come and go due to hardware fail­
                  ures or upgrades, we need a way to manage the replacement of a Pod so that
                  each Pod is attached to the right storage. This is the purpose of a StatefulSet.
                  A StatefulSet identifies each Pod with a number, starting at zero, and each
                  Pod receives matching persistent storage. When a Pod must be replaced, the
                  new Pod is assigned the same numeric identifier and is attached to the same
                  storage. Pods can look at their hostname to determine their identifier, so a
                  StatefulSet is useful both for cases with a fixed primary instance as well as
                  cases for which a primary instance is dynamically chosen.
                      We’ll explore a lot more details related to Kubernetes StatefulSets in
                  the next several chapters, including persistent storage and Services. For this

124   Chapter 7
   The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
              chapter, we’ll look at a basic example of a StatefulSet and then build on it as
              we introduce other important concepts.
                   For this simple example, let’s create two Pods and show how they each
              get unique storage that stays in place even if the Pod is replaced. We’ll use
              this YAML resource:

sleep-set.yaml ---
               apiVersion: apps/v1
               kind: StatefulSet
               metadata:
                   name: sleep
               spec:
              ¶ serviceName: sleep
                 replicas: 2
                 selector:
                    matchLabels:
                      app: sleep
                 template:
                    metadata:
                      labels:
                        app: sleep
                    spec:
                      containers:
                        - name: sleep
                          image: busybox
                          command:
                            - "/bin/sleep"
                            - "3600"
                       · volumeMounts:
                            - name: sleep-volume
                               mountPath: /storagedir
              ¸ volumeClaimTemplates:
                    - metadata:
                        name: sleep-volume
                      spec:
                        storageClassName: longhorn
                        accessModes:
                          - ReadWriteOnce
                        resources:
                          requests:
                            storage: 10Mi

                  There are a few important differences here compared to a Deployment
              or a Job. First, we must declare a serviceName to tie this StatefulSet to a Ku­
              bernetes Service ¶. This connection is used to create a Domain Name Ser­
              vice (DNS) entry for each Pod. We must also provide a template for the
              StatefulSet to use to request persistent storage ¸ and then tell Kubernetes
              where to mount that storage in our container ·.

                                                                  Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   125
      The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                      The actual sleep­set.yaml file that the automation scripts install includes
                  the sleep Service definition. We cover Services in detail in Chapter 9.
                      Let’s create the sleep StatefulSet:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl apply -f /opt/sleep-set.yaml

                      The StatefulSet creates two Pods:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl get statefulsets
                  NAME    READY   AGE
                  sleep 2/2       1m14s
                  root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
                  NAME      READY STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
                  ...
                  sleep-0 1/1       Running 0             57s
                  sleep-1 1/1       Running 0             32s

                      The persistent storage for each Pod is brand new, so it starts empty.
                  Let’s create some content. The easiest way to do that is from within the con­
                  tainer itself, using kubectl exec, which allows us to run commands inside a
                  container, similar to crictl. The kubectl exec command works no matter
                  what host the container is on, even if we’re connecting to our Kubernetes
                  API server from outside the cluster.
                      Let’s write each container’s hostname to a file and print it out so that we
                  can verify it worked:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl exec sleep-0 -- /bin/sh -c \
                    'hostname > /storagedir/myhost'
                  root@host01:~# kubectl exec sleep-0 -- /bin/cat /storagedir/myhost
                  sleep-0
                  root@host01:~# kubectl exec sleep-1 -- /bin/sh -c \
                    'hostname > /storagedir/myhost'
                  root@host01:~# kubectl exec sleep-1 -- /bin/cat /storagedir/myhost
                  sleep-1

                      Each of our Pods now has unique content in its persistent storage. Let’s
                  delete one of the Pods and verify that its replacement inherits its predeces­
                  sor’s storage:

                  root@host01:~# kubectl delete pod sleep-0
                  pod "sleep-0" deleted
                  root@host01:~# kubectl get pods
                  NAME      READY STATUS      RESTARTS   AGE
                  ...
                  sleep-0 1/1       Running 0            28s
                  sleep-1 1/1       Running 0            8m18s
                  root@host01:~# kubectl exec sleep-0 -- /bin/cat /storagedir/myhost
                  sleep-0



126   Chapter 7
The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
           After deleting sleep-0, we see a new Pod created with the same name,
       which is different from the Deployment for which a random name was gen­
       erated for every new Pod. Additionally, for this new Pod, the file we created
       previously is still present because the StatefulSet attached the same persis­
       tent storage to the new Pod it created when the old one was deleted.


       Daemon Sets
       The DaemonSet controller is like a StatefulSet in that the DaemonSet also
       runs a specific number of Pods, each with a unique identity. However, the
       DaemonSet runs exactly one Pod per node, which is useful primarily for
       control plane and add­on components for a cluster, such as a network or
       storage plug­in.
           Our cluster already has multiple DaemonSets installed, so let’s look at
       the calico-node DaemonSet that’s already running, which runs on each node
       to provide network configuration for all containers on that node.
           The calico-node DaemonSet is in the calico-system Namespace, so we’ll
       specify that Namespace to request information about the DaemonSet:

       root@host01:~# kubectl -n calico-system get daemonsets
       NAME          DESIRED CURRENT     READY UP-TO-DATE     AVAILABLE            ...
       calico-node 3           3         3       3            3                    ...

           Our cluster has three nodes, so the calico-node DaemonSet has created
       three instances. Here’s the configuration of this DaemonSet in YAML
       format:

       root@host01:~# kubectl -n calico-system get daemonset calico-node -o yaml
       apiVersion: apps/v1
       kind: DaemonSet
       metadata:
       ...
         name: calico-node
         namespace: calico-system
       ...
       spec:
       ...
         selector:
           matchLabels:
             k8s-app: calico-node
       ...

           The -o yaml parameter to kubectl get prints out the configuration and
       status of one or more resources in YAML format, allowing us to inspect Ku­
       bernetes resources in detail.




                                                          Deploying Containers to Kubernetes   127
       The Book of Kubernetes (Sample Chapter) © 7/8/22 by Alan Hohn
                        The selector for this DaemonSet expects a label called k8s-app to be set
                   to calico-node. We can use this to show just the Pods that this DaemonSet
                   creates:

                   root@host01:~# kubectl -n calico-system get pods \
                     -l k8s-app=calico-node -o wide
                   NAME                READY STATUS     ... NODE   ...
                   calico-node-h9kjh 1/1       Running ... host01 ...
                   calico-node-rcfk7 1/1       Running ... host03 ...
                   calico-node-wj876 1/1       Running ... host02 ...

                        The DaemonSet has created three Pods, each of which is assigned to one
                   of the nodes in our cluster. If we add additional nodes to our cluster, the
                   DaemonSet will schedule a Pod on the new nodes as well.


      Final Thoughts
                   This chapter explored Kubernetes from the perspective of a regular cluster
                   user, creating controllers that in turn create Pods with containers. Having
                   this core knowledge of controller resource types is essential for building our
                   applications. At the same time, it’s important to remember that Kubernetes
                   is using the container technology we explored in Part I.
                        One key aspect of container technology is the ability to isolate contain­
                   ers in separate network namespaces. Running containers in a Kubernetes
                   cluster adds additional requirements for networking because we now need
                   to connect containers running on different cluster nodes. In the next chap­
                   ter, we consider multiple approaches to make this work as we look at overlay
                   networks.




128    Chapter 7
