                            2
   MANAGING A DEVELOPMENT TEAM




As the development manager at a small company, you
have a unique role not found in most large companies.
Whether your title is chief technology officer, vice president of
engineering, or director, you must connect the CEO and
members of the executive team directly to your devel-
opment team. In a small company, you must be able to
stretch in ways that differ from those of a development
manager in a large company.




                            Growing Software
                         (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
Understanding Your Core Management Values
Before delving into the mechanics of managing a team, let’s take an intro-
spective look at what it takes to be an effective manager. Ask yourself how
you want to work with your development team and how your core values
affect how you interact with others. Your respect for others, ethics, coach-
ing and listening skills, ability to provide feedback, and concern for the
success of others all affect how you make decisions.

As a manager, you need a “toolkit” of approaches you can access
when working with your team. Your toolkit should include methods for
motivating people, making yourself available, choosing the team’s tools,
organizing the team, setting up the workspace, managing projects, resolv-
ing conflict, and communicating with your team. With multiple tools and
approaches on hand, you can select the best tools for the job.

In contrast, a rigid manager might have only one tool—the one he used at
the last job at the last company. But as the saying goes, If your only tool is a
saw, then the solution to every problem is to cut.

The following sections consider the key tools and components of a set
of core values: trust, flexibility, sincerity, confidentiality, respect, and
empowerment.

Trust
Companies with an environment of trust are the most productive, because
workers do not waste energy on politics, pointing out others’ mistakes, or
guarding their backsides. These companies encourage direct communi-
cation—employees trust management and each other to pass on correct
information and get support for their work. This fosters high worker
morale, as workers focus their energies on being productive instead of
on being wary.

Employees at small companies must be able to believe what they hear from
senior management, because working at a small firm can be riskier than
working for a large company. Since small and growing companies often
lack significant resources, a high-trust environment drives the efficiencies
that are essential to success.

Employees at companies with low-trust cultures waste energy focusing on
other people’s mistakes and protecting their positions. Workers believe


26   Chapter 2
                                  Growing Software
                               (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
they need to double-check the veracity of all statements from manage-
ment. In such companies, management perpetuates low-trust cultures by
rewarding low-trust behavior, such as political maneuvering, public verbal
complaints about others, rumors, power plays to force decisions on other
teams, and backstabbing. Low-trust cultures tend to breed in companies
at which people are worried about losing their jobs. Management is often
authoritative and political. Senior managers spend their energy pulling
other people down to pull themselves up. In the absence of focused posi-
tive effort by top management, short-term advantages exist for individuals
who exhibit low-trust behaviors to advance their position.

Why don’t more companies create high-trust environments? Building trust
requires that management make a focused effort by discussing company
values and core beliefs every day and not just at yearly reviews. A high-trust
culture requires that managers hire the right people, train them in com-
pany culture, and model the behaviors they expect.




                               LAS T ONE S T ANDING

     Our QA team consisted of six engineers, and we were good at what we did.
     When our QA manager left the company for another job, the VP in charge
     appointed a manager without QA experience and without management expe-
     rience. Our team was willing to give him a chance. However, over the next
     four months, he managed to alienate all of us by showing no interest in qual-
     ity. Gradually, the other team members found other jobs and the manager did
     not replace them.

     I was the last QA engineer employed at the firm. I wrote an email to my man-
     ager asking him to show more interest in QA. I expressed concern over how
     the rest of the team had left the firm and how he had not replaced them. He
     fired me and had me escorted out of the building that day for insubordination.
     I should not have trusted him to be fair, even in a private communication.

     I found out later that this QA manager quit two weeks after I was dismissed to
     take a management job at another company. He destroyed the QA team and
     then left the company.

     —QA engineer




                                    Growing Software        Managing a Development Team   27
                                 (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
As a manager, you can build trust by exhibiting high standards of fairness,
confidentiality, respect, sincerity, and conflict resolution. You deal effec-
tively with development team members who break your trust. For example,
if a team member reports to you that she has completed a task, you expect
the task to be completed correctly. If you later discover she did not com-
plete the task, you will no longer trust her. This person will be a drag on
your time, as you have to inspect her work carefully to ensure that it’s get-
ting done correctly.

In high-trust environments, a development manager looks out for her
team. She doesn’t view the team as machinery to accomplish a job; nor
does she consider her role to be simply a conduit for passing off upper-
management’s demands and problems to the team. Instead, she acts in
the interests of both her team and her company.

Trust can appear to be an abstract concept. The following examples help
to illustrate high-trust and low-trust responses to different situations:

     •    You are attending an executive meeting and a fellow manager men-
          tions that one of your senior developers failed to deliver a project
          on time. Although marketing contributed to the delay by changing
          the requirements at the last minute, you and the developer agreed
          to make the changes.
          •      Low-trust response Point out in the executive meeting that
                 the marketing manager made it impossible for the developer to
                 complete the project on time. He changed the definition too
                 many times, running up the costs without your consent.
          •      High-trust response Indicate that you agree that the result
                 was unacceptable. You plan to review the project with the goal
                 of improving future performance. You invite the marketing
                 manager to join in the discussion.
     •    A developer tells you about his interest in getting a master’s degree.
          You know another engineer who would like to join the team if a
          spot became available.
          •      Low-trust response Find an excuse to lay off the engineer
                 who spoke to you because you know he was likely to leave
                 anyway.




28   Chapter 2
                                     Growing Software
                                  (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
         •    High-trust response Try to determine whether the engineer
              can attend classes while still working for your firm. Ask him to
              provide as much notice as possible if he decides to leave the
              company to pursue an education.
    •    Your commercial servers went down for four minutes during peak
         time. Your initial analysis points to an error on the operations team,
         compounded by a software flaw that prevented the proper system
         automatic recovery. You do not manage the operations team.

         •    Low-trust response Tell the CEO about the operations
              team’s mistake immediately while pointing out the need for the
              operations director to improve staff training.
         •    High-trust response Spend some time investigating the issue
              with the director of operations. Then, the two of you meet with
              the CEO and describe the sequence of events and what steps
              you plan to work on jointly to prevent this from happening
              again.

Flexibility
A team of workers who believe they are trusted will act in a trustworthy
fashion; being flexible in how you treat your team will help you build a
high-trust environment. Treat members of the team as you would like your
boss to treat you. Focus on individual successes as well as team successes.
Developers are not just hired hands, but people with a career and a life
outside of work. If you are fair and honest in your approach with them,
they will generally treat you fairly and honestly in return.

You can show flexibility when a team member encounters problems or life
situations that make it difficult for her to work in the usual ways. Flexibil-
ity in such a situation might mean allowing her to work from home for an
extended period or allowing her to take time off. Flexibility can also mean
shifting a person’s working hours or shifting weekday work to weekend
work short-term.

You can also demonstrate flexibility in making work assignments, making
adjustments to align required work with the desires of individual team
members. Each developer would then be able to focus on particular tasks
that are of interest to him or her; this improves team members’ morale and




                                  Growing Software       Managing a Development Team   29
                               (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
usually provides valuable cross-training that does not occur if individuals
focus on the same areas repeatedly.

Flexibility does not mean providing the same solutions to all team mem-
bers, whether or not they have a problem. For example, if one employee
has family issues that require him to work from home for a week, every-
one on the team should not then be allowed to work at home. When an
employee will be working remotely or at hours that differ from those of
the team, tell your team about the accommodation to help them under-
stand your decision. Of course, in some circumstances, you should leave
the accommodated employee’s details vaguely defined, because telling
others the details would be inappropriate.

A manager’s flexibility has an impact on all the other core management
areas. An employee is more likely to trust a manager who shows flexibility
when the employee is experiencing a situation that makes it difficult to
complete work as usual.

Some employees might take advantage of your flexible approach, but hav-
ing an employee take advantage of you occasionally is better than being
totally inflexible. While a few individuals might be untruthful about their
circumstances, most people are honest.


Sincerity
Your team members will appreciate your sincere concern for their success.
You can demonstrate your concern in words and actions, but ultimately



                     SI N C E R I T Y IS NOT A M ANAGE M E NT F AD

       My manager openly talks about the fact that the job we have now may not
       be the one we always want to have. She encourages people to explore their
       interests even if it means they might end up leaving the team. She continues to
       do this even when the company is not filling vacated positions. She constantly
       puts our individual best interests first and is committed to working out whatever
       staffing problems arise as a result. This makes us all want to keep working
       for her!

       —Senior technical writer




30   Chapter 2
                                       Growing Software
                                    (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
                             W H Y NOBODY BE LIE VE D

      The management team held a company meeting to announce layoffs and
      budget cuts. The CEO indicated that we were forced to freeze hiring and we
      would have to spend money carefully until business picked up. A week later,
      all the company managers received Mercedes leased by the company. When
      asked at the next company meeting why this occurred, the CEO explained that
      senior executives had previously had a “car allowance” that the accountants
      said was not tax-deductible. So management leased the cars instead, and they
      happened to arrive right after the budget cuts. When asked why he did not
      cut this expense, his response was that this type of incentive was necessary to
      retain top management talent.

      —Hardware engineer




your actions count. If your employees believe you are sincere and trust-
worthy, they are more likely to follow your direction when you are trying
new approaches to solving problems rather than resisting every step of
the way.

If your actions show that you are insincere, it doesn’t matter how earnest
you appear while talking to people; you will not be trusted, and you’ll be
far less effective as a manager, which can lead team members to under-
mine you. Your team will lose focus on achieving the best results for the
company. Consider, for example, the case of an unprofitable company
that makes budget cuts. After the manager asks his team to save money and
spend only on essentials, he purchases a new computer system for his desk,
even though his current system is fairly new; this manager would probably
lose his team’s respect and ruin his credibility.


Confidentiality
Confidence also builds trust. If an employee confides in a manager,
she expects that the information will not be shared with others or used
inappropriately. Unless a confiding employee commits a serious ethical
breach, violates laws, or puts the company at risk, you should never
share this information or use it against the person. By encouraging an
environment in which people can confide in you, you can help resolve
problems rather than allowing them to grow.


                                     Growing Software        Managing a Development Team   31
                                  (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
Consider, for example, an employee who tells you that she wants to
work on a different type of project. She has spoken with other companies
about potential employment. On hearing this information, some manag-
ers would immediately lay off the employee or reassign her to unimportant
tasks—because she is leaving anyway. However, since the employee has vol-
untarily revealed this information, it shows that she trusts you, and, in fact,
she might not really want to leave—she might be giving you an opportunity
to change her project assignment. If she does decide to leave the com-
pany, she will likely give you time to transfer her responsibilities to others
because she trusts and respects you.


Respect
Individuals on your team must be treated with respect, by you and by oth-
er developers and co-workers. Lack of respect can be shown overtly—for
example, when someone verbally demeans another person face-to-face or
behind the other’s back. It can also be shown in a subtle way, such as when
someone belittles another person by demeaning his or her qualifications,
skills, or abilities to others.

If one member of your team demeans another, pull the abuser aside and
talk to him. Don’t wait for the situation to “work itself out.” Depending on
the extent of the problem, you might need to involve human resources.

Build respect by creating a team environment that focuses on solving
problems, not pointing out other people as problems. Encourage staff to
work out problems individually, and offer assistance only when they prove
unwilling or unable to do so themselves.


Empowerment
Successful developers enjoy their work and look forward to the next chal-
lenge. They are self directed and empowered because you have defined
goals, stepped back, and let them succeed. Empowered workers will
succeed.

In contrast, workers who feel micromanaged go through the paces, viewing
work as an acceptable task in exchange for pay. They know that the tasks
required by management are sometimes inefficient or useless, but they
believe they are unable to change the way things are done. Management
treats them like plumbers hired to clean out a drain and then go home.


32   Chapter 2
                                 Growing Software
                              (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
To empower your team members, make sure they understand develop-
ment goals and boundaries. Boundaries define reasonable limits but are
never such sacred cows that they cannot be discussed or changed. Clear
boundaries and flexibility to choose a solution will prevent workers from
feeling micromanaged.

The following are examples of types of boundaries:

       Project constraints Schedules, features, budgets, and resources
       Company policies     Requiring management approval for spending
       company funds
       Technical boundaries      Partner deals that force specific technology
       on a solution
       Business boundaries Choices for specific software components
       that might require managerial buy-in due to ongoing excessive
       operational costs

Once you have set up clear boundaries, let team members choose how they
will work together to reach the solution. Set the team loose, monitor prog-
ress, and coach them to success.


Communicating with Your Team
Successful communication requires that you consider what you want to say
and how you want to say it—before you start talking. Your communication
should be tailored to fit each situation: Realize that what might work in
one environment might not be effective in another.

When communicating with your team, plan to cover project work and peo-
ple topics. Project work includes development efforts to create revenue,
projects to reduce risk, and strategies to improve productivity. People top-
ics include coaching, training, correcting, answering questions, resolving
concerns, discussing long-term problems, discussing new ideas, assisting
with work needs, and helping with career planning.

Too often, management focuses only on project work, addressing current
practical issues that drive the company’s short-term success. However, fail-
ing to address other issues when communicating can lead to long-term




                                Growing Software       Managing a Development Team   33
                             (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
failures that result in decreased productivity, increased staff turnover, qual-
ity problems, missed opportunities, and morale problems. Spend at least
a fifth of your communication time on efforts not tied to current projects.
Consider a communication approach for project topics that differs from
the tack you take for people topics; each needs its own venue to ensure
that it is properly covered. The following sections discuss approaches to
communicating with your team, including one-on-ones, project communi-
cation, team meetings, and informal conversations.


One-on-Ones
A weekly one-on-one meeting with individual developers gives managers
the best opportunity for covering most people topics. (In contrast, team
building requires team meetings to develop relationships and improve
interactions.) If your team is larger than six people, you might need
to limit one-on-one meetings to every other week because of the time
involved.

One-on-one meetings can provide opportunities to build trust and listen to
each individual’s concerns. Let the employee direct the initial discussion.
Try to avoid discussing current tasks and status issues at the beginning of
the conversation. Sometimes developers will not be forthcoming with infor-
mation, so you can help get them started by asking questions such as these:

     •    Do you have any concerns about your work?
     •    Have you experienced or noted any problems recently?
     •    Do you have any ideas for improvement?
     •    Do you need additional equipment or software?
     •    What are your long-term career plans?
     •    Do you have any ideas to share?

One-on-one meetings are ideal for discussing problems, offering advice,
agreeing on solutions to problems, and sometimes assigning a task or
requesting a solution to a problem. Make assignments clear, but avoid
spelling out the exact details of the solution. Instead, establish agreement
on what success looks like: Give the employee the authority to solve the
problem, and offer advice. In general, don’t immediately assign the task of




34   Chapter 2
                                 Growing Software
                              (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
                                  NOT LIS T E NING

     Early in my career, I had a boss who was a poor listener. When I brought up
     issues to let him know what was going on, he would interrupt the discussion
     and start giving me instructions. He would issue orders before I was fully able
     to describe the problems I was trying to resolve. I stopped discussing problems
     with him.

     —Software manager




problem resolution to the person who brought it up. If you make a habit of
doing this, your staff will bring fewer problems to your attention.

If you want to use one-on-one meetings for project status updates, wait to
discuss status until after you have covered the other topics. If you start with
project status, updates might take up all of your meeting time and other
issues will not get attention.


Project Communication
How you handle project communication depends on the size of the project
and the release cycle. With short release cycles, daily stand-up meetings—
15- to 20-minute meetings in which all participants stand—can be appro-
priate. The manager structures the meetings at the same time each day,
asking participants to offer brief statements that describe what they did
during the previous day, what they plan to do today, and any immediate
help they require. Stand-up meetings are not intended as problem-solving
meetings or topic discussions. Instead, any identified problems can be
assigned to individuals for resolution and follow-up.

For projects with long release cycles, weekly project status meetings combined
with visiting and talking with people at their desks can be helpful. This
weekly meeting usually lasts 30 minutes to an hour. Status and schedule
meetings usually involve some detailed discussions, along with plans for the
next few weeks. The team identifies risks and the project manager assigns
individuals to work toward mitigating those risks.




                                    Growing Software        Managing a Development Team   35
                                 (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
You can communicate project status to the team via intranet/wiki
postings, emails, whiteboard messages, or reviews during regular status
meetings. Some team members will not know the full project status or will
be unaware of recent changes to the project or schedule. Not communi-
cating the overall status to the team can lead to confusion, while clearly
communicating this information improves morale and likelihood of proj-
ect success. If you provide your team with regular status updates, they
will be more likely to point out problems and discrepancies early on, and
they’ll also be more likely to get their status reports to you on time.

When communicating project status to the team, scale the content and fre-
quency of the report to the size of the effort. The status description should
include information about projects that have been recently finished, which
projects will be tackled next, any product functionality that has changed,
projected completion dates as of today, problems encountered, and cur-
rent identified risks.

On-time project completion depends on accurate status information that
allows time for the team to make midcourse corrections.


Team Meetings
Scheduling team meetings at regular intervals will enhance team cohesion
and team performance. Team meetings can occur every week or every two
weeks, depending on the team size. The meetings can serve as forums for
discussing general concerns or as opportunities to provide training on new
processes and policies. Team meetings also allow team members to discuss
concerns or ask questions.

Meetings should not be ad-lib events, however, so you should prepare an
agenda or list of topics in advance. Open a file on your desktop and keep
it open, adding items as they come up; this file becomes the basis for the
next meeting’s agenda. An established agenda will help keep the meet-
ing short and help avoid rambling discussions. Circulate the agenda in
advance for an even more effective meeting.

Overly long team meetings drain energy from the team and impact your
bottom line, so keep them as short as possible. Long team meetings are
expensive, too—for example, a meeting that lasts 2 hours for a team of 12
takes the same amount of time as 3 engineering days (24 hours).



36   Chapter 2
                                Growing Software
                             (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
Allow engineers to speak about concerns such as policies and senior man-
agement decisions. Keep track of these issues and questions and review
them weekly with the team, even if you do not yet have answers. Make sure
you provide ongoing status of open items raised at earlier team meetings
and work toward closure of issues and questions.

Occasionally, a disgruntled engineer can use a team meeting as a
complaint session. If the engineer crosses the line from constructive sug-
gestions to destructive complaining, cut the conversation short and ask
him to meet with you individually to discuss his concerns.

Regular development team meetings are not good venues for detailed
technical discussions. Set up separate technical meetings, during which
you can focus on specific topics, and make most of these meetings discre-
tional, so that people who do not need to attend can opt out. Otherwise,
engineers not affected by the specific technical topics will end up spending
time listening to discussions that are not helpful to them.


Conflict Resolution
At some point, disagreements will arise between team members. As their
manager, you should encourage them to resolve disagreements directly,
rather than let disagreements impede cooperation. Typical disagreements
concern such issues as technology choices, common resource usage, or
inconsiderate behavior. Team members can usually work out technology
and resource disagreements directly or sometimes through a moderated
discussion, but inconsiderate behavior requires a different approach.

Problems between co-workers can build up to a point at which the people
can no longer work together. If one person is angry at another, counsel
the aggrieved party to ask the other person to meet in a conference room
to discuss the problem so that a solution can be proposed. If they cannot
resolve their differences, you can arrange a joint session to talk through
the problem. However, if a conflict involves unprofessional behavior, inter-
vening first can work best: Pull the individuals aside at the start and discuss
the details of the situation with resolution as the goal.

Occasionally, conflicts occur between members of your team and people
in other groups. These conflicts often involve missed deliverables, but
poor communication is usually at the core. Encourage the individuals to



                                 Growing Software       Managing a Development Team   37
                              (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
talk about the issue first. Offer to assist if they cannot resolve the issue or if
emotions are running high.

When assisting to resolve a difficult conflict, first speak with each person
involved to understand both sides of the issue. Reconstruct the events in a
timeline. Then call a review meeting with the participants and their manag-
ers, as appropriate. Present the factual events causing the conflict without
making judgments. Ask the parties to consider what they can do differently
to improve the situation the next time it occurs. Add your recommenda-
tions, if necessary.



                           A C TI N G T O R E S OLVE C ONF LIC T

       A project manager and her boss told me that they were unhappy with one of
       my engineers. The project was due live on the website at midnight, and work
       had stretched until after 5 PM. The manager told me that the engineer was sup-
       posed to have called when he completed his work. The engineer did not call,
       so the project manager called another engineer who completed the work just
       before midnight.

       It turns out that the project manager gave the engineer a slip of paper with the
       person’s phone number to call when the work was ready. Unfortunately, the
       engineer lost the number. Instead, he sent an email when the work was com-
       plete. The project manager did not look for the email and thought that the
       engineer had forgotten.

       After talking through all the details of the project, I arranged a joint session
       with the individuals and the other manager. I stepped through the timeline
       factually and described the missteps. We discussed as a group how to avoid
       these issues going forward: For future after-hours work, the project manager
       would write a one-page plan. The plan would list who is doing what, how
       completed steps are communicated, and the participants’ phone numbers. If a
       misstep occurred in the future, people agreed that they would call the manag-
       ers that evening.

       After the meeting, the participants indicated that they were pleased with the
       outcome.

       —Web engineering manager




38   Chapter 2
                                       Growing Software
                                    (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
Don’t ignore conflicts in the hope that they will go away, though they
sometimes do. Instead, pay attention to conflicts, encourage people to
resolve them directly, and intervene when necessary. In addition, instead
of asking an aggrieved engineer if he would like mediation, coach that
engineer on conflict resolution.


Training
Company-sponsored training indicates that the company cares enough
about its employees to invest in their futures; most engineers will recipro-
cate with increased company loyalty. Training, of course, can also improve
an engineer’s performance, as she learns new approaches to technology,
self-management, and work habits.

In general, engineers have based their careers on technical knowledge and
respond positively to technical training. Technology changes so rapidly
that much of the raw technical details in use today will become obsolete in
a few years. Consequently, most engineers try to keep abreast of leading-
edge technical knowledge, and this makes training an important aspect
of work life. While technology training benefits engineers in the short
term, general work skills training can have long-lasting positive effects on
their careers. For example, learning time-management skills will make
an engineer more productive regardless of what technology he is using.
Most engineers will benefit from training on a variety of topics, such as
the following:

   Time management                   Delegation
   Project management                Management basics
   Making presentations              Conflict resolution
   Meeting management                Employee motivation
   Systems analysis                  Coaching
   Negotiation                       Interviewing
   Marketing basics                  Project budget management
   Return on investment basics       Customer communication
   Process improvement               Understanding emotional intelligence
   Defining requirements             Understanding personality styles
   Quality improvement




                                Growing Software       Managing a Development Team   39
                             (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
Unfortunately, training in small companies is often limited by budget con-
straints. Since training trades short-term costs for long-term benefits, the
costs can be difficult to justify when budgets are tight. In addition, many
senior managers see little value in providing training to development engi-
neers. This means training budgets are often the first things cut when the
CEO tightens the purse strings.

Resist the temptation to ignore training when budgets are tight. Instead,
consider various training alternatives such as the following:

     •    Offer to approve the expense of any reasonable book purchase.
     •    Select books on a topic and discuss them with the engineers; this
          can be an excellent way to provide inexpensive training.
     •    Ask one team member to share information about a topic with the
          team for an hour.
     •    Provide the training yourself by setting up a mini-course.
     •    Investigate online training options.
     •    Investigate small local training agencies that might be able to
          provide lower cost training than larger training houses.
     •    Investigate the possibility of large training firms providing classes to
          staff from multiple companies to lower the per-person cost.

Unfortunately, management often considers only the short-term costs of
training, ignoring the costs of not providing training and the longer term
benefits it can provide. Cutting even low-cost training is a strategic mistake
for a small and growing company. Training improves employee stability
and productivity, and small companies rely on employees and depend on
low employee turnover to be successful.


Coaching
One of the most direct and satisfying ways to improve team performance
is through individual coaching. Good coaching guides people toward self-
improvement, which benefits the company as well as the individual.




40   Chapter 2
                                   Growing Software
                                (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
                    C O N TI N U I TY IN T HE T R AINING AT T IT U DE

       When money was available for training at my company, I focused on making
       a list of training course opportunities and surveyed the development team to
       determine the highest interest items. I hired a local training company and we
       received excellent courses on time management, managing meetings, and
       project management.

       The next year, budgets were tight, so the executive team eliminated training
       expenses. However, the need for training did not disappear. I purchased
       books on training topics for team members to read. I reviewed the books
       again and created a course outline, organizing the topic into a flow. After
       managers had read the books, I gave a two-hour training session on each
       topic, including a presentation plus a back-and-forth discussion following an
       outline I prepared.

       I found that providing a training course was beneficial to me as a manager.
       The classes forced me to review the material and thereby refreshed my knowl-
       edge of the topics.

       —Product development director




Successful coaching requires that the coach understands an individual’s
goals. Here are some good questions to ask as you coach a member of the
development team:

   •     What motivates you?
   •     What are your long-term and short-term goals?
   •     What technologies interest you?
   •     What training would you like to have?
   •     What tasks do you enjoy doing most in your job?
   •     What do you like the least about your job?

Some people find it difficult to vocalize their career goals. As a result, a
development engineer might look for a new job to advance her career
instead of asking her current employers for more options. Convincing an
engineer to stay when she has an employment offer from another company



                                      Growing Software        Managing a Development Team   41
                                   (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
                 LI STE N I N G R E QU IR E S HAVING A C ONVE R S AT ION

       Early in my career, an excellent engineer left my company because she
       wanted to do something else technically. Had I known, I could have arranged
       her work assignments to provide her with the technical challenge she was
       looking for.

       She made the assumption that her current assignments were all that were
       available and that there was no point in asking for something different. She
       accepted an offer from another company. Although I told her I could change
       her work assignments, she did not want to go back on her word. By all indica-
       tions, if I had known earlier and changed her assignments, she would have
       stayed.

       —Engineering director




is difficult. It’s far better to keep employees happy by coaching them and
giving them the assignments they want, when possible.

Effective coaching requires a manager’s time and an ability to listen.
Coaching should be an important part of the weekly one-on-one meetings.
You can coach individuals on how to improve their performance in a non-
threatening way while encouraging them to improve.

Coaching is not simply cheerleading—it is aligning your team members
with what they do best, providing extra training and practice for those who
need improvement, and listening to concerns and determining how you
can address them. In addition, coaching means pulling people aside and
correcting them when they are approaching their tasks in the wrong way.


Motivating Your Team Members
Development teams are motivated in ways that differ from those of other
teams—engineers generally do not respond well to “rah-rah” pep talks,
emotional appeals, or contests. What motivates individual development




42   Chapter 2
                                      Growing Software
                                   (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
engineers varies, but they will usually tell you what they need if you ask
them. These are some common motivations for engineers:

   •     Technical challenge
   •     Opportunity for career success and advancement
   •     Opportunity to participate in an outside organization, forum, or
         technology group
   •     Financial opportunity such as a stock award or raise
   •     Chance to go to conferences or seminars
   •     Flexible work schedule that allows them to schedule their own day
         and not have to arrive at 8 AM or be marked late
   •     Recognition from peers
   •     Recognition from respected managers
   •     Ability to take on senior-level tasks such as code reviews and new
         project estimates
   •     Opportunity to be part of a well-run team—an elite group of
         engineers paired with great management
   •     Opportunity to work on a flagship product
   •     Opportunity to work on a project that has applications in the “real
         world” outside the company




                         MO TI VAT ION T HR OU GH C HANGE

       An engineer on my team was unhappy with his assignments. His performance
       was poor. He was argumentative and often late in delivery. He requested a
       transfer to another technical area. While my boss advised me to let him go, I
       gave him a shot at the technology he wanted. Over the next few months, the
       quality and timeliness of his work improved greatly. He was excited about
       learning and his attitude improved. The gamble of giving him a chance to do
       what he wanted paid off.

       —Engineering manager




                                      Growing Software       Managing a Development Team   43
                                   (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
Engineers, like most workers, are usually at their best when they enjoy their
work. Adding a little pressure to achieve reasonable goals will add to their
overall success. If an engineer participates in establishing and committing
to project content and delivery, he or she will feel motivated and enjoy the
effort.

If engineers are encouraged and enjoy their work, many will want to put
in extra effort. You can encourage them by determining what kind of work
they enjoy most and create those assignment opportunities with realistic,
attainable goals. Empower team members by involving them in estimating
the work effort and delivery dates. Listen to and address your team’s con-
cerns. Ensure that the team has the proper tools to get the job done. Then
watch them succeed.

In contrast, continually pushing people to commit to excessive overtime
will lower team motivation and morale and can lead to people looking for
new jobs. Engineers, like everyone else, need balance in their work and
lives. You cannot build a high-trust environment or company loyalty if you
expect employees to forego a balanced life.

Finally, acknowledge successes publicly. Your direct appreciation of a per-
son’s work builds up his or her motivation. You can express appreciation by
talking directly to the person. Alternatively, you can show appreciation by
personalizing a reward. Reward traditions vary considerably company by
company, so consider these traditions when deciding on rewards. If your
company does not have a reward tradition, start one. For example, you can
set aside a budget to purchase small rewards to celebrate successes—time
with a masseuse, extra vacation time, humorous plaques, a bonus or raise,
gift cards, and coffee cards, for example.


Coaching Problem Employees
Every manager eventually encounters an employee who behaves inappro-
priately or who is difficult to work with—a “problem employee.” Perhaps
you inherited this person from the manager who preceded you, he might
be part of a reorganization, or you might have hired him. Even though
small companies cannot afford employees who are not good workers, you
can and should make a good faith effort to improve an employee’s prob-
lem behaviors.



44   Chapter 2
                                Growing Software
                             (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
You might be tempted to delay dealing with a problem employee because
you have so many important tasks to do. However, procrastination just
allows more time for the problem to grow and affect other employees.
Instead, as soon as a pattern of poor performance emerges, you should
deal with the employee’s problems.

Two categories of problems are common: employees who perform poorly
and employees who disrupt the team with their poor attitude. A poorly
performing employee will not deliver work on time or accurately commu-
nicate about his or her workload. An employee with a poor attitude has
negative or condescending interactions with other employees or continu-
ally disparages the company. Like acid, this person will eventually corrode
team cohesion and your ability to manage the team.

Start the correction process by talking to the employee about what you
observe and try to determine the source of the issue. A number of rea-
sons can exist for the employee’s actions, including the following: The
employee might need additional training but is afraid to ask; the employee
might have a short-term personal problem and needs schedule flexibility to
resolve it; the employee might need some coaching on how to be effective;
or the employee might be unhappy with his or her work assignment.

Depending on the problem, you can work directly with the employee to
offer coaching. However, if the employee insists that no problem exists
or behavior explanations appear inadequate, he or she will probably not
respond to your coaching. In such a case, you will need to move more rap-
idly to a formalized performance improvement plan.

When coaching an employee, start by agreeing on specific actions that
would improve his or her work; this will provide goals and an impetus
to improve. Then monitor progress and offer periodic progress reports.
To keep coaching positive and not punitive, encourage the employee to
perform well rather than only pointing out mistakes. If you describe what
success looks like from your perspective and emphasize the importance
of the worker’s efforts to the company, he or she will be more likely to take
the coaching as a positive opportunity.

If the employee’s performance does not improve over the next month
or you note a failure to make a reasonable effort to improve, you should
consider additional measures, such as a formal improvement plan. The
timing for when to formalize an improvement plan varies depending on


                                Growing Software       Managing a Development Team   45
                             (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
the situation. Put the employee “on notice” that his or her actions can lead
to termination. Although some managers will fire the worker without a
plan, you should create a plan to offer a fair opportunity for the employee
to change and to provide some protection for your company from legal
action.

Requirements for performance plans vary. Talk to your company’s human
resources group to understand its requirements. A performance improve-
ment plan should define specific problems, spell out the problem behavior
as well as what success looks like, and describe the consequences of failure.
In general, use no more than a 60-day review period for the plan.

Do not assume that performance plans automatically lead to dismissal.
Although some employees will fail or will leave a company on their own,
some will make an honest effort to improve and will succeed. Treat
employees as though you expect them to succeed.


Reviews and Evaluations
Employee evaluations must be an ongoing effort throughout the year—
don’t wait until the formal employee review to show appreciation for
results or discuss a problem. In fact, an annual review is not the place to
bring up problem behavior. Waiting for the annual review to offer an
employee negative feedback is a poor but common management practice
that usually stems from a manager’s desire not to confront the individual
about a problem until forced to do so; this contributes to a low-trust envi-
ronment, however. Though the annual review process usually forces the
confrontation, most employees will feel blindsided if the first they hear
of an issue is in their annual review. An annual review should reveal no
surprises.

Companies handle annual reviews in a variety of ways. Many small compa-
nies offer no reviews, offer annual reviews for everyone at the same time,
or offer annual reviews based on anniversary hire dates. From the company
perspective, the review is driven by human resources (HR) to support cor-
porate needs—perhaps to ensure that a review is on file to avoid potential
lawsuits, especially if the person is terminated, or to reward people for
good work so that they will stay.




46   Chapter 2
                                Growing Software
                             (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
Creating the Review
Do not wait until review time to collect information or offer feedback to
team members. Instead, provide feedback all year during your one-on-one
meetings. You should also collect data throughout the year by writing notes
in a file about each employee’s performance, rather than trying to remem-
ber this information at the end of the year. Having your notes at hand will
make writing the review easier for you and more fair to the employee.

One popular practice is called the 360-degree review. In this scenario, either
HR or the manager collects information for the review from people work-
ing with the employee to be reviewed. People in other teams or co-workers
can usually offer useful insight into the employee’s performance. As part
of the 360-degree review, you should also require a self-appraisal from the
employee. Self-appraisals are great opportunities for employees to list their
achievements for the year and judge their own performance. Often the
self-appraisals will remind you of tasks the employee took on months ago
that you had forgotten.

A punctual essay review is the best type of review because it covers mul-
tiple areas of performance. To write an essay review, start by collecting
information. Ask the employee to complete his or her own version of the
review and deliver it in advance of your meeting. If the company requires
an employee self-appraisal, read it first. If self-appraisals are not required,
you can still ask for them. Write your essay review with descriptions of the
employee’s successes and areas needing improvement. Keep the language
straightforward and the text relatively short. On completion, review each
sentence to make sure that it fits in the overall picture you want to provide
for the employee.

A general format for the review covers results, successes, improvements,
and a summary. At the beginning of the review, describe in detail the
engineer’s projects. The earlier notes and files for the year will make this
task easy. Provide a short written discussion of each project, and describe
the employee’s performance and major efforts. Next, describe areas of
strengths and weakness. Suggest techniques that might help him or her
improve performance. Propose areas for which the employee would ben-
efit from more training. You should also propose goals for the next year.
Finally, provide a summary describing the employee’s overall performance.




                                 Growing Software       Managing a Development Team   47
                              (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
You might be required to fill out standard forms for the review. This does
not preclude you from writing an essay and attaching it to the forms,
however.


Delivering the Review
When you deliver the review, discuss each of the different areas reviewed.
Avoid the temptation to hand the employee the written review at the start
of the meeting, because he or she will quickly read it and not internalize
what you are trying to say. Instead, spell out the major points and ask ques-
tions to determine whether the employee agrees or disagrees with your
assessments. Give the employee time and encourage him or her to ask
questions. When reasonable, make the review session a positive, uplifting
discussion.

At the end of the meeting, provide a written copy of the review to the
employee. You might consider scheduling a follow-up meeting for the day
after the review if it seems appropriate. This gives the employee an oppor-
tunity to think about the review and convey any thoughts the next day.


Providing Late and Deficient Reviews
Reviews are important to employees for career and financial reasons. Pro-
viding regularly scheduled reviews on time is a sign of respect. A late review
can be demoralizing for an employee who is asked to wait. Providing late
reviews add to employee anxiety and can make the employee believe he or
she is neither important nor respected.

The anxiety level is often greater if the review is tied to an annual salary
increase. A few companies have the abominable practice of not backdat-
ing raises if the manager delivers the review late. In these companies, a
manager’s delay leads to lost income for the employee, so the review is
no longer a positive experience; it has turned into a negative experience
that increases the employee’s cynicism and destroys his or her trust in the
company.

Delayed reviews can cause other problems, as well. Development engineers
will let others know of their concerns about the company and manage-
ment. They might assume management is delaying the reviews so the
company can save money and may thus speculate that the company is in
financial trouble.


48   Chapter 2
                                 Growing Software
                              (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
So why do managers deliver late reviews? For most managers, writing a
review is a painful process that they avoid by indefinitely delaying the task,
not writing anything, or not offering advice during the reviews. Many man-
agers ignore the importance of the review to ongoing employee goodwill.

Poorly written reviews also have a negative impact on employees. Such
a review might list only a few bullet points along with the HR-mandated
evaluation boxes in a few different categories. The only review worse than
a poorly written review is one that the manager did not write at all. If HR
requires a review session but nothing else, the review can become a hand-
shake annual review, in which the manager offers the employee a few verbal
comments along with a raise figure and a handshake.




                       THE HA N DS HAKE ANNU AL R E VIE W

     I have received a half-dozen handshake annual reviews in my career. I usually
     find them disappointing, as they offer no guidance for the future. They also
     indicate that my manager does not want to spend the time thinking about
     how I really did. The reviews were all positive, so I would have liked a written
     record. The record is valuable to me, especially when I have a new manager.

     My favorite reviews are upbeat discussions with details and ideas for improve-
     ment that I can actually act on.

     —Engineer




HR departments can make it easy for managers to write poor reviews in
several ways. First, the review form can use rating checkboxes that allow a
manager to assign a numerical value to each area. In some companies, the
sum or average of the numbers on the form constitutes the employee’s rat-
ing. This approach falsely assumes that all the rating items have equivalent
value and will lead to skewed employee evaluations.

Some forms have limited space for including information about an
employee’s key attributes. Advising an employee is difficult when you
are limited to two lines of comments. A reasonable review requires full
descriptions.



                                       Growing Software        Managing a Development Team   49
                                    (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
A minimum standard for quality of the review or feedback is often missing.
If a manager can produce an acceptable review by checking boxes and writ-
ing “Good work,” the standard is too low. A form review can be easy, but it
does not serve the company or the employees.

Reviews should be a ceremonial culmination of continuous feedback and
coaching. Annual reviews are easy to write by drawing from the outputs of
a yearlong coaching system. Employees spend a year of their lives develop-
ing software for your company. Condensing a person’s effort into a short
summary of “Good work” and a checklist is
          5      Unacceptable              Acceptable
on the part of the manager. Instead, use the review to reinforce the coach-
ing you provided throughout the year.


Additional Reading
Here is some additional reading on topics presented in this chapter:

          1001 Ways to Reward Employees, by Bob Nelson (Workman Publishing
          Company, 2005)
          Becoming a Coaching Leader: The Proven Strategy for Building Your Own
          Team of Champions, by Daniel S. Harkavy (Thomas Nelson, 2007)
          Love ’em or Lose ’em, by Beverley Kaye and Sharon Jordan-Evans
          (Berrett-Koehler Publishing, 1999)
          Managing Software Maniacs: Finding, Managing, and Rewarding a
          Winning Development Team, by Ken Whitaker (Wiley, 1994)
          Managing Technical People: Innovation, Teamwork, and the Software
          Process, by Watts S. Humphrey (Addison-Wesley Professional, 1996)
          Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, by Tom DeMarco and
          Timothy Lister (Dorsett House Publishing Company, 1999)
          Slack: Getting Past Burnout, Busywork, and the Myth of Total Efficiency,
          by Tom DeMarco (Broadway, 2002)
          What Every Manager Should Know About Training: An Insider’s Guide to
          Getting Your Money’s Worth from Training, by Robert F. Mager (CEP
          Press, 1999)




50   Chapter 2
                                    Growing Software
                                 (C) 2009 by Louis Testa
