Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                              10
         M I N I M U M S PA N N I N G T R E E S




            The minimum spanning tree of a weighted,
            undirected graph is the set of edges with
           the smallest total weight that connects all
        the nodes. We can use this concept to model
 and optimize a variety of real-world problems, from
 designing power grids to hypothesizing how chipmunks
 should be constructing their burrows.
       This chapter introduces two classical algorithms for constructing
 minimum spanning trees. Prim’s algorithm is a nodewise agglomerative
 algorithm that builds a bigger and bigger set of connected nodes. Kruskal’s
 algorithm constructs a minimum spanning tree from a sorted list of edges
 by adding one edge at a time.
       After discussing how minimum spanning trees can be applied to
 ­several real-world problems, we consider two additional algorithms closely
  related to minimum spanning trees: grid-based maze generation and single-
  linkage clustering. We show how these tasks can be mapped into graph
  problems and solved using variations of the algorithms from this chapter.
                    Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




      The Structure of Minimum Spanning Trees
                    A spanning tree of a graph is a set of edges that connects all the nodes in the
                    graph without forming any cycles. We can visualize spanning trees as the
                    backbone of a real-world infrastructure network—the minimum connections
                    needed to make every node reachable from any other node. These might be
                    power lines, roads, links in a computer network, or the tunnels between holes
                    in a chipmunk burrow. The minimum spanning tree is the set of edges that con-
                    nect all the nodes while minimizing the sum of the edge weights.
                         We can picture these requirements in terms of an especially well-
                    organized chipmunk’s burrow, as shown in Figure 10-1. The chipmunk con-
                    structs their domain as a series of holes (nodes) linked by tunnels (edges).
                    As in a graph, each tunnel directly links exactly two holes in a straight line.
                    The chipmunk imposes two additional requirements. First, each hole to
                    the surface needs to be reachable through its tunnels from any other hole.
                    After all, what good are multiple entrances if they don’t let you vanish into
                    one and pop out of another? Second, the total distances of tunnels must be
                    minimized. The chipmunk is lazy and would prefer to expend its energy
                    randomly popping out of the ground at various points rather than digging
                    new tunnels.




                    Figure 10-1: Five chipmunk holes connected as a
                    minimum spanning tree

                         Formally we define the problem of finding the minimum spanning tree
                    in a weighted, undirected graph as follows:

                         Given a graph with a set of nodes V and edges E, find the set of
                         edges E′ ⊆ E that connects every node in V while minimizing the
                         sum of edge weights ∑e ∈E ′ weight(e).

                    By definition, the minimum spanning tree will have |V    | – 1 edges, the mini-
                    mum number needed to connect |V    | nodes. Any more edges would add
                    cycles and unnecessary weight.


      Use Cases
                    This section introduces a few real-world examples of using the minimum
                    spanning tree concept to design cost-efficient physical networks or optimize
                    communications in a social network.



154    Chapter 10
Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




 Physical Networks
 Minimum spanning trees are useful in determining the minimum cost set
 of links that we need to build to fully connect a physical network. Imagine
 that the Algorithmic Coffee Shop Company is looking to build a state-of-
 the-art pneumatic tube system for delivering beans between its locations.
 After promising to serve over 10,000 varieties of coffee, the company quickly
 realizes that it lacks the storage space in some locations to keep such a vast
 variety on hand. Instead, it decides to build a central warehouse and ship
 small packets of beans to each store as needed. Every store will now boast an
 unparalleled selection.
      The planners quickly realize that it is prohibitively expensive to build
 pneumatic tubes from every store to the warehouse. The two stores in
 Javaville are each located over 10 miles from the distribution center, but
 only two blocks from each other. It is much cheaper to build a single tube
 from the distribution center to the Main Street location and then a second
 tube from Main Street to the Coffee Boulevard location. A request for the
 Coffee Boulevard location can be satisfied by first sending the beans to the
 Main Street location and then forwarding them to Coffee Boulevard.
      This multistep routing turns the design of the pneumatic delivery sys-
 tem into a minimum spanning tree problem, as shown in Figure 10-2. Each
 of the Algorithmic Coffee Shop Company’s buildings is a node and each
 potential tube between any pair is an edge.
    Coffee Boulevard




                       Main Street


                                     To distribution center

 Figure 10-2: Two coffee shops on a minimum
 spanning tree delivery network

      In Figure 10-2, the weight of an edge is the cost it would take to build
 the pneumatic tube between the two buildings. While often a factor of dis-
 tance, the cost can also increase due to environmental factors. For example,
 building a tube that cuts through the center of a city is much more expen-
 sive than the same length tube under a farm. The planners need to find the
 set of edges (tubes to construct) that connects all the buildings while mini-
 mizing the cost.




                                                               Minimum Spanning Trees   155
                    Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                       Aside from pneumatic coffee tubes, more typical applications of
                    minimum-cost spanning trees to physical networks include the following:
                         Constructing highways ​  ​Nodes are cities, edges are highways, and
                         edge weight is the cost to construct a highway between two points.
                         Power grids ​  ​Nodes are cities, edges are transmission lines, and edge
                         weight is the cost to construct the transmission lines between two
                         points.
                         Bridging an archipelago ​  ​Nodes are islands in the archipelago, edges
                         are physical bridges between two islands, and edge weight is the cost to
                         construct a bridge between two islands.
                         Design of airline networks ​  N​ odes are airports, edges are flights, and
                         edge weight is the cost of flying between two airports.

                    Social Networks
                    Minimum spanning trees also apply to non-physical networks. For example,
                    imagine a Society for Personal Communication Between Data Structure
                    Experts that does not believe in bulk emails. Such announcement methods
                    are much too impersonal. Instead, the organizers insist that each message
                    be passed by a personal call from member to member. However, like in any
                    organization consisting of experts, there exists a range of old friendships
                    and feuds. Last year, Alice Hash Table had a falling out with Bob Binary
                    Search Tree, and they no longer talk.
                         Every year, the organization develops an elaborate phone tree allow-
                    ing the organization to spread the news of its upcoming conference while
                    minimizing the discomfort of its members. Each member is represented as
                    a node with edges to each other member. The cost of an edge is the level
                    of discomfort two members have with talking to one another. In the best
                    case, a chat among friends, the weight is minimal to represent the time cost
                    of the phone call. However, in the worst case, the cost between two feud-
                    ing members results in days of lost productivity and angry muttering. The
                    organization needs to find the set of pairwise communications that informs
                    every member about the conference details while minimizing overall angst.
                    This requires all nodes to be connected using the minimum number and
                    cost of edges.


      Prim’s Algorithm
                    Constructing a minimum spanning tree requires an algorithm to select a
                    minimum cost subset of the edges from the full graph such that the result-
                    ing graph is fully connected. One method of finding a graph’s minimum
                    spanning tree is Prim’s algorithm, which was independently proposed by mul-
                    tiple people including computer scientist R.C. Prim and mathematician
                    Vojtěch Jarník. The algorithm operates very similarly to Dijkstra’s algorithm




156    Chapter 10
Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




 in Chapter 7, working through an unvisited set and building up a minimum
 spanning tree one node at a time.
      Prim’s algorithm starts with an unvisited set of all nodes and arbitrarily
 chooses one to visit. This visited node forms the start of the minimum span-
 ning tree. On each iteration, the algorithm finds the unvisited node with
 the minimum edge weight to any of the nodes that it has previously visited,
 asking, “Which node is closest to our set’s periphery and thus can be added
 with the least cost?” The algorithm removes this new node from the unvis-
 ited set and adds the corresponding edge to the minimum-cost spanning
 tree. It keeps adding nodes and edges, one per iteration, until it has visited
 every node.
      Prim’s algorithm will visit each node at most once and consider each
 edge at most twice (once from each end). Additionally, for each node, we
 may see a cost proportional to the logarithm of |V    | to insert or update a
 node in the priority queue implemented as a standard heap. The total cost
 of the algorithm therefore scales as (|V    | + |E|) × log (|V    |).
      We can picture Prim’s algorithm as a construction company hired to
 upgrade bridges between islands in an archipelago. The company plans to
 replace the rotting wooden bridges connecting the archipelago with fully
 modern versions. Because the old wooden bridges will not support the
 weight of the construction equipment, from the company’s point of view,
 only islands joined by a new bridge are truly connected. Their contract
 specifies that, in the end, any pair of islands must be reachable with a new
 modern bridge.
      The builders start at a single island and work outward, connecting more
 and more islands with new bridges. At each step, they choose to upgrade
 the shortest wooden bridge that joins an island in the current connected set
 to an island outside that set. By always starting new bridges from an island
 in the connected set, the builders can move their equipment to the new
 edge’s origin using modern bridges. By always ending bridges on islands
 outside the connected set, the builders increase the coverage of the con-
 nected set at every stage.

 The Code
 At each step of Prim’s algorithm, we track the unconnected nodes along
 with the best edge weight seen that would connect them. We maintain this
 data using a custom PriorityQueue implementation that provides an efficient
 mechanism for looking up values in the queue and modifying priorities.
 For the purposes of this code, you need to understand only the basics of
 inserting items into the priority queue, removing items from the priority
 queue, and modifying priorities. However, if you’re curious, you can review
 the details in Appendix B.
     The code itself loops over the nodes in the priority queue until it is
 empty. Every time it removes a new node from the priority queue (the unvis-
 ited set), it examines that node’s unvisited neighbors and checks whether
 the current node provides better (that is, lower cost) edges to any of its



                                                               Minimum Spanning Trees   157
                   Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                   unconnected neighbors. If so, it updates the neighbor’s information with
                   the new edge and weight:

                   def prims(g: Graph) -> Union[list, None]:
                       pq: PriorityQueue = PriorityQueue(min_heap=True)
                       last: list = [-1] * g.num_nodes
                       mst_edges: list = []

                     1 pq.enqueue(0, 0.0)
                       for i in range(1, g.num_nodes):
                           pq.enqueue(i, float('inf'))

                     2 while not pq.is_empty():
                           index: int = pq.dequeue()
                           current: Node = g.nodes[index]

                          3 if last[index] != -1:
                                mst_edges.append(current.get_edge(last[index]))
                            elif index != 0:
                                return None

                          4 for edge in current.get_edge_list():
                                neighbor: int = edge.to_node
                                if pq​.­in​_­queue(neighbor):

                                     if edge.weight < pq.get_priority(neighbor):
                                         pq.update_priority(neighbor, edge.weight)
                                         last[neighbor] = index

                        return mst_edges

                        The code starts by creating a trio of helper data structures, includ-
                   ing a min-heap-based priority queue of unconnected nodes (pq), an array
                   indicating the last node visited before a given node (last), and the final
                   set of edges for the minimum spanning tree (mst_edges). The code requires
                   importing the custom PriorityQueue class defined in Appendix B, as well as
                   importing Union from Python’s typing library.
                        All nodes are inserted into the priority queue at the start of the algo-
                   rithm 1. The starting node (0) is given priority 0.0 and the rest are given
                   infinite priority. The code then proceeds like Dijkstra’s algorithm, process-
                   ing the unvisited nodes one at a time. A while loop iterates until the priority
                   queue of unvisited nodes is empty 2. During each iteration, the node with
                   the minimum distance to any of the visited nodes is chosen and dequeued
                   from the priority queue. As we will see, this effectively removes the node from
                   the unvisited set.
                        The code next checks whether there exists an edge back to one of the
                   nodes in the connected set 3. There are two cases in which the node’s last
                   entry might be -1. The first is node 0, which does not have a predecessor by
                   virtue of being explored first. The second case is in a disconnected compo-
                   nent where index is not reachable from node 0. In this latter case, because



158   Chapter 10
Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




 all the nodes cannot be connected, the graph does not have a minimum
 spanning tree and the function returns None.
      After adding the new node to the visited set (by dequeuing it), a for
 loop iterates over each of the node’s neighbors 4, checking whether the
 neighbor is unvisited (still in the priority queue). If so, the code checks
 whether it has found a better edge to the node by comparing the previous
 best edge weight with that of the new edge. The code finishes by returning
 the set of edges making up the minimum spanning tree.
      Note that if a graph is disconnected, each connected component has
 its own minimum spanning tree. An alternative approach to the code pre-
 sented here is to return the list of edges that create the minimum spanning
 trees for each connected component. We can implement this by removing
 the elif check 3 and its corresponding return. The code will then move
 on to the next component by selecting a node from the priority queue and
 continue selecting edges.

 An Example
 Figure 10-3 shows an illustration of Prim’s algorithm on a graph with eight
 nodes. The table to the right of each subfigure shows the information
 tracked for each node, including the node’s ID, the distance to that node
 from the connected set of nodes as stored by the node’s priority, and the
 closest member of the current connected subset as stored in the last list.
 All nodes except the first one start with an infinite distance and a last node
 pointer of -1 to indicate that we have yet to find a path that leads to that
 node. After removing a node from the priority queue, we gray out its row to
 indicate it is no longer under consideration.
      The search starts at node 0 in Figure 10-3(a). This corresponds to our
 island bridge building company setting up operations at its headquarters
 on its home island. The search removes this node from the priority queue,
 checks each of node 0’s neighbors, and updates the information accord-
 ingly. Node 1 is assigned a distance of 1.0 and node 3 a distance of 0.6. Both
 neighbors’ last values now point back to node 0 as the closest node in the
 connected subset.
      In Figure 10-3(b), the search progresses to the closest node that is
 not in the connected subset. This corresponds to building the first bridge
 between islands. The algorithm dequeues node 3 with a distance (priority) of
 0.6, adds it to the connected subset, and checks its neighbors 4 and 6. These
 are both newly reachable via an edge from node 3. The search updates both
 nodes’ priorities and last values.
      The search next explores node 1 in Figure 10-3(c). While checking the
 neighbors of node 1, it finds a shorter edge connecting to node 4. This is
 equivalent to the workers noticing the old wooden bridge (1, 4) is shorter
 and thus cheaper to upgrade than the other wooden bridge (3, 4) that is
 currently slated for an upgrade. The search thus updates the distance from
 node 4 to 0.5 and updates its last pointer to node 1 to reflect the origin of
 the connecting edge. The search is now scheduled to use the edge from
 (1, 4) to join node 4 to our connected set instead of the previous edge (3, 4).


                                                               Minimum Spanning Trees   159
                          Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




            1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last               1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last
      0               1               2                                    0               1               2
                                                 0     0.0     -1                                                     0     0.0    -1
0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4                        0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4
                                                 1     1.0     0                                                      1     1.0     0
                                                 2     inf    -1                                                      2     inf    -1
            1.5            1.5                                                   1.5            1.5
      3               4               5          3     0.6     0           3               4               5          3     0.6     0
                                                 4     inf    -1                                                      4     1.5     3
                          2.5                                                                  2.5
                                          1.4    5     inf    -1                                               1.4    5     inf    -1
          1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                 6     inf    -1                                                      6     1.0     3
                      6               7          7     inf    -1                           6               7          7     inf    -1
                           0.3                                                                  0.3
                                (a)                                                                  (b)


            1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last               1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last
      0               1               2                                    0               1               2
                                                 0     0.0    -1                                                      0     0.0    -1
0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4                        0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4
                                                 1     1.0     0                                                      1     1.0     0
                                                 2     1.2     1                                                      2     0.4     5
            1.5            1.5                                                   1.5            1.5
      3               4               5          3     0.6     0           3               4               5          3     0.6     0
                                                 4     0.5     1                                                      4     0.5     1
                          2.5                                                                  2.5
                                          1.4    5     0.2     1                                               1.4    5     0.2     1
          1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                 6     1.0     3                                                      6     1.0     3
                      6               7          7     inf    -1                           6               7          7     1.4     5
                           0.3                                                                  0.3
                                (c)                                                                  (d)


            1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last               1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last
      0               1               2                                    0               1               2
                                                 0     0.0    -1                                                      0     0.0    -1
0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4                        0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4
                                                 1     1.0     0                                                      1     1.0     0
                                                 2     0.4     5                                                      2     0.4     5
            1.5            1.5                                                   1.5            1.5
      3               4               5          3     0.6     0           3               4               5          3     0.6     0
                                                 4     0.5     1                                                      4     0.5     1
                          2.5                                                                  2.5
                                          1.4    5     0.2     1                                               1.4    5     0.2     1
          1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                 6     1.0     3                                                      6     1.0     3
                      6               7          7     1.4     5                           6               7          7     1.4     5
                           0.3                                                                  0.3
                                (e)                                                                  (f)


            1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last               1.0            1.2                  node   dist   last
      0               1               2                                    0               1               2
                                                 0     0.0    -1                                                      0     0.0    -1
0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4                        0.6             0.5         0.2           0.4
                                                 1     1.0     0                                                      1     1.0     0
                                                 2     0.4     5                                                      2     0.4     5
            1.5            1.5                                                   1.5            1.5
      3               4               5          3     0.6     0           3               4               5          3     0.6     0
                                                 4     0.5     1                                                      4     0.5     1
                          2.5                                                                  2.5
                                          1.4    5     0.2     1                                               1.4    5     0.2     1
          1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                 6     1.0     3                                                      6     1.0     3
                      6               7          7     0.3     6                           6               7          7     0.3     6
                           0.3                                                                  0.3
                                (g)                                                                  (h)

Figure 10-3: An illustration of Prim’s algorithm
       Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




            In the next five subfigures, the search progresses to node 5, node 2,
        node 4, node 6, and node 7, respectively, checking each node’s unvisited
        neighbors and updating any for which it finds shorter edges. The size
        of the connected subgraph grows by one each step until all nodes are
        connected.


Kruskal’s Algorithm
        An alternative to the node-by-node approach of Prim’s algorithm is to
        take an edge-centric approach to constructing minimum spanning trees.
        Kruskal’s algorithm, invented by multidisciplinary scholar Joseph B. Kruskal,
        works by looping over a sorted list of edge weights and progressively add-
        ing edges to build the minimum spanning tree. Intuitively, we want to
        add the graph’s smaller edges, since they are the least expensive connec-
        tions between nodes. If we maintain a list of edges sorted by weight, we
        can proceed through it, adding the next edge that would help build the
        minimum spanning tree. This loop over a sorted list forms the core of
        Kruskal’s algorithm.
             Kruskal’s algorithm’s cost scales proportional to |E| log (|E|). The algo-
        rithm starts by extracting and sorting each edge, requiring time propor-
        tional to |E| log (|E|). Using an efficient implementation of the union-find
        algorithm, we can combine the sets in |E| log (|V    |) time. As long as |E| ≥ |V    |,
        the algorithm will scale as |E| log (|E|).
             We can visualize Kruskal’s algorithm in the context of a pet owner
        building a complex living space for their beloved hamster. The hamster
        already has several large habitats that the owner decides to connect using
        clear tubes, giving their pet free range to roam between cages. The habi-
        tats’ arrangement within the room is fixed. The owner, looking to minimize
        the total tubing needed, measures each pairwise distance between habitats,
        sorts the list, and determines which tube to add next. Unlike the island
        building example, the pet owner does not need to worry about transporting
        construction equipment from node to node. They can easily move between
        any pair of nodes to build the connection.

        Union-Find
        Beyond finding the next lowest-cost edge, we need to answer one additional
        question when considering each new edge: does this edge join nodes from
        currently disconnected clusters? If not, the edge is redundant. Remember
        that the key word here is minimum. If we already have edges (A, B) and (B, C),
        the edge (A, C) doesn’t help, as node C was already reachable from node A
        through node B.
            To efficiently implement Kruskal’s algorithm, we make use of a new
        helper data structure, UnionFind. This data structure allows us to represent
        a collection of different sets, which we will use to track the connected




                                                                       Minimum Spanning Trees   161
                   Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                   components of the graph. The data structure facilitates a few efficient, set-
                   based operations, including the following:
                        are_disjoint(i, j) ​  ​Determines whether two elements i and j are in dif-
                        ferent sets. We use this to test whether two nodes are part of the same
                        connected set.
                        union_sets(i, j) ​  ​Merges the set with element i and the set with element
                        j into a single set. We use this to connect two sets of nodes when adding
                        an edge.
                        The data structure also tracks a count of the disjoint sets that is
                   updated with each operation (num_disjoint_sets).
                        For the purposes of the algorithms in this book, it is not necessary to
                   dive into the details of UnionFind. It is sufficient to treat it as a module that
                   facilitates the operations described. Interested readers can find a basic
                   description and the code sufficient to implement the algorithms in this
                   book in Appendix C.

                   The Code
                   Given the helper data structure, the code for Kruskal’s algorithm consists
                   of two main steps. First, we create a list of all the graph’s edges and sort it.
                   Second, we iterate through that list by checking whether the current edge
                   joins disconnected components and, if so, adding it to our minimum span-
                   ning tree:

                   def kruskals(g: Graph) -> Union[list, None]:
                       djs: UnionFind = UnionFind(g.num_nodes)
                       all_edges: list = []
                       mst_edges: list = []

                     1 for idx in range(g.num_nodes):
                           for edge in g.nodes[idx].get_edge_list():
                             2 if edge.to_node > edge.from_node:
                                   all_edges.append(edge)
                     3 all_edges.sort(key=lambda edge: edge.weight)

                        for edge in all_edges:
                          4 if djs.are_disjoint(edge.to_node, edge.from_node):
                                mst_edges.append(edge)
                                djs.union_sets(edge.to_node, edge.from_node)

                     5 if djs.num_disjoint_sets == 1:
                           return mst_edges
                       else:
                           return None




162   Chapter 10
Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




      The code starts by creating a series of helper data structures, includ-
 ing a UnionFind data structure representing the current disjoint sets (djs) to
 determine which points already belong to the same cluster, a list (all_edges)
 that will store the sorted list of edges, and an empty list (mst_edges) to hold
 the resulting edges for the minimum spanning tree. The code then loops
 over every node in the graph to fill these helper data structures 1. For each
 node, it inserts each of the node’s edges into the list of all edges.
      Since our representation of an undirected graph includes the edge (A, B)
 in the adjacency lists for both node A and node B, the code uses a simple
 check to avoid adding the same edge twice 2. (Note that this check is only
 needed to improve the efficiency when using this representation of an undi-
 rected graph. The code would still work correctly without the check but
 would include twice the number of edges in all_edges.)
      After the full list of edges is assembled, the code sorts the edges in
 order of increasing weight 3. The code iterates over each edge in the
 sorted list with a single for loop, then uses the UnionFind data structure to
 check whether the edge connects two currently unconnected components 4.
 If so, the edge is useful. The code adds it to the set of edges from the mini-
 mum spanning tree (mst_edges) and merges the disjoint sets for the edge’s
 nodes.
      Finally, the code checks whether it was able to connect all the nodes
 into a single connected component 5. If so, it returns the list of edges for
 the minimum spanning tree. Otherwise, it returns None. If we remove this
 final check, the code will instead return the edges from the individual
 minimum spanning trees for graphs that are not a single connected
 component.

 An Example
 Figure 10-4 shows an example of Kruskal’s algorithm running on a graph
 with 8 nodes and 12 edges.
      The search begins with an empty set of edges and thus a disconnected
 set of nodes. In Figure 10-4(a), the search selects the edge with the lowest
 weight from our graph. This corresponds to the edge (1, 5) with a weight
 of 0.2. The edge in the figure is marked in bold to indicate it is part of the
 minimum-cost spanning tree. Nodes 1 and 5 are now part of the same con-
 nected subset, and the search has reduced the number of disjoint sets from
 eight to seven.
      The search continues in Figure 10-4(b) by choosing the edge with the
 next lowest weight. This time it connects nodes 6 and 7 through an edge
 with weight 0.3. It has reduced the number of disjoint sets to six.




                                                               Minimum Spanning Trees   163
                            Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




            1.0              1.2                              1.0               1.2                             1.0               1.2
      0                 1               2               0                 1               2               0                 1               2
                              0.2                                                   0.2             0.6               0.5             0.2       0.4
0.6             0.5                         0.4   0.6               0.5                       0.4

            1.5              1.5                              1.5               1.5                             1.5               1.5
      3                 4               5               3                 4               5               3                 4               5
                            2.5                                               2.5                                               2.5
          1.0                               1.4             1.0                               1.4             1.0                               1.4

                        6               7                                 6               7                                 6               7
                             0.3                                                0.3                                               0.3
                    (a)                                               (b)                                                 (c)


            1.0               1.2                             1.0              1.2                              1.0              1.2
      0                 1               2               0                 1               2               0                 1               2

0.6               0.5             0.2       0.4                                 0.2                                               0.2
                                                  0.6             0.5                         0.4   0.6             0.5                         0.4

            1.5               1.5                             1.5              1.5                              1.5              1.5
      3                 4               5               3                 4               5               3                 4               5
                            2.5                                               2.5                                               2.5
          1.0                               1.4             1.0                               1.4             1.0                               1.4

                        6               7                                 6               7                                 6               7
                              0.3                                              0.3                                               0.3
                      (d)                                             (e)                                               (f )


            1.0              1.2
      0                 1               2

0.6             0.5           0.2           0.4

            1.5              1.5
      3                 4               5
                            2.5
          1.0                               1.4

                        6               7
                             0.3
                    (g)

Figure 10-4: An illustration of Kruskal’s algorithm

                                In the next two subfigures, the search adds nodes 2 and 4 to the first
                            connected subset {1, 5}, resulting in a connected set consisting of {1, 2, 4, 5}. In
                            Figure 10-4(e), the algorithm merges another two singleton nodes by join-
                            ing nodes 0 and 3 via the edge with weight 0.6. It then joins up the remain-
                            ing three disjoint sets by adding the edges (0, 1) and (3, 6) in the following
                            two subfigures. At this point, we are down to a single set, which means our
                            minimum-cost spanning tree edges connect all the nodes in the graph.




164       Chapter 10
      Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




Maze Generation
       While the graph searches presented in preceding chapters allow us to
       algorithmically solve mazes, they cannot help us generate mazes in the
       first place. In this section, we take a detour from the more canonical uses
       of minimum spanning tree algorithms, such as building transportation
       networks, to show how we can extend Kruskal’s algorithm to create random
       but always solvable mazes. To make the mazes sufficiently fun, we ensure
       that each has exactly one valid solution.
            Imagine we are given the task of generating a maze for the children’s
       place mat at a local family restaurant. Our design can be simple but must
       be solvable, with only one path through the maze. The restaurant owners
       wisely do not want to challenge young patrons with impossible mazes, lest
       this results in screaming and thrown food.

       Representing Grid-Based Mazes
       For simplicity of the code in this section, we represent our mazes using a
       regular grid of squares like the ones on graph paper. After hours of careful
       consideration about how to draw our mazes, we decide to shade individual
       edges to represent the maze’s walls. The player can move between any two
       adjacent squares that do not have a wall between them. As we draw each
       line, we eliminate a potential option for leaving that square and perhaps
       chuckle at the difficult task we are creating.
           Figure 10-5(a) shows an example grid-based maze. We can equivalently
       represent this grid structure using a graph, as shown in Figure 10-5(b).

                                      S
         S




                        E                                            E


                (a)                                 (b)

       Figure 10-5: A grid-based maze and its graph representation

           In Figure 10-5(b), each square in the maze corresponds to a single graph
       node. We add undirected edges between any two adjacent nodes without a
       wall so that an edge indicates the ability to travel from one node to another.

       Generating Mazes
       We construct our maze by starting with a grid-based graph and building a
       randomized spanning tree algorithm based on Kruskal’s algorithm to con-
       nect all the nodes. The grid-based initial structure gives us connections
       based on adjacency. Each node has up to four connections to the nodes

                                                                         Minimum Spanning Trees   165
                   Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                   above, below, left, and right of it. Generating a spanning tree allows us to
                   ensure that each node is reachable from any other node and that we can
                   reach the ending node from the starting one.
                        We define the valid edges using a connected grid-based graph, as
                   shown in Figure 10-6. Like the grids we generated in Chapter 5, this graph
                   represents all the nodes we need to connect and the set of potential edges
                   we can use to connect them. If our grid has a width of w and a height of h,
                   it contains h × w nodes and undirected edges (with equal weights of 1) con-
                   necting neighboring nodes.




                   Figure 10-6: A grid-based graph

                        If we used the graph in Figure 10-6 for our final maze, there would
                   be a huge number of potential paths between any two locations. In other
                   words, the graph does not make for a particularly fun or challenging maze.
                   Beginning at the start node, we could traverse directly to the end node by
                   moving the minimum number of steps in one horizontal and one vertical
                   direction. Real-world equivalents would be a hedge maze implemented as
                   an empty lawn or a blank maze on our place mat. To construct an interest-
                   ing maze, we need to use a minimum subset of these edges.
                        As in Kruskal’s algorithm, we start with an empty spanning tree where
                   none of the nodes are connected. In the case of our grid-based place mat,
                   we start with a grid of boxes. One by one, we add edges to our spanning
                   tree and erase the lines between adjacent boxes. We can alternatively visual-
                   ize the connection of two components as a cartoon figure removing a physi-
                   cal wall between two adjacent rooms by using an oversized sledgehammer
                   or simply bursting through the wall. As our cartoon character gleefully
                   opens up passageways (or we carefully erase grid lines), the disparate com-
                   ponents connect and a path through the maze forms.
                        The key to generating a random maze is, intuitively, to choose the next
                   edge randomly. Both Kruskal’s and Prim’s algorithms rely on some method
                   to break ties among equal-weight edges. In this case, however, all edges
                   have the same edge weight (1.0), so we can just pick one at random. If the
                   chosen edge connects two disjoint components, we keep it. This edge opens
                   a path between two previously unreachable components. Otherwise, in the
                   case where the chosen edge joins two already connected components, we
                   discard it, since adding multiple paths between components would result in
                   loops and break the maze convention of having a single path.


166   Chapter 10
Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




 The Code
 The following code allows us to randomly create a set of maze edges from a
 grid-based graph:

 def randomized_kruskals(g: Graph) -> list:
   1 djs: UnionFind = UnionFind(g.num_nodes)
     all_edges: list = []
     maze_edges: list = []

   2 for idx in range(g.num_nodes):
         for edge in g.nodes[idx].get_edge_list():
             if edge.to_node > edge.from_node:
                 all_edges.append(edge)

   3 while djs.num_disjoint_sets > 1:
         num_edges: int = len(all_edges)
       4 edge_ind: int = random.randint(0, num_edges - 1)
         new_edge: Edge = all_edges.pop(edge_ind)

       5 if djs.are_disjoint(new_edge.to_node, new_edge.from_node):
             maze_edges.append(new_edge)
             djs.union_sets(new_edge.to_node, new_edge.from_node)

     return maze_edges

       The function takes a full grid-based graph (g) to define the list of
 edges. The code starts by setting up helper data structures, including a
 UnionFind data structure representing the disjoint sets (djs), a list of all edges
 (all_edges), and a list of the maze or spanning tree edges (maze_edges) 1. As
  in Kruskal’s algorithm, the code extracts the comprehensive list of edges
  from the graph 2.
       The algorithm iterates through a single while loop until all nodes are
 the same set (and thus reachable) 3. During each iteration of the loop,
 the algorithm selects an edge randomly 4, using Python’s random library’s
 r­ andint() function (which requires us to include import random at the start
 of the file). It then removes the selected edge from the list of all edges
 and checks whether it joins two previously disjoint sets 5. If so, the edge
 is added to the list of maze edges and the corresponding sets are merged.
 Otherwise, the edge is ignored. The algorithm completes after all the nodes
 are merged into a single set, returning the list of edges that defines the
 maze: the minimum spanning tree.

 An Example
 Figure 10-7 shows an example of the first few steps of this algorithm. The
 left diagram of each subfigure shows the current maze as defined by the
 walls that have been removed, while the right diagram shows the maze as
 defined by edges that have been added to a graph. During each step (each
 iteration of the while loop), one edge at most is added.



                                                               Minimum Spanning Trees   167
                   Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                                     (a)                                           (b)




                                     (c)                                           (d)




                                     (e)                                           (f)

                   Figure 10-7: Six steps of the maze construction algorithm

                        It is not strictly necessary to construct the full grid-based graph (g)
                   ahead of time. Instead, we could just programmatically fill the all_edges
                   list based on computed adjacencies, as we did when constructing grids in
                   Chapter 5, for example. However, for the purposes of this chapter, starting
                   with the full grid-based graph makes the code’s connection to Kruskal’s
                   algorithm more apparent and keeps the function simpler.
                        The randomized Kruskal’s algorithm is a simplistic approach to gener-
                   ating mazes that makes no guarantee that the ending node is at the end of
                   a deep path with a bunch of turns. It may result in quite boring mazes such
                   as the ones shown in Figures 10-8(a), 10-8(b), and 10-8(c). We can only be
                   sure that the algorithm will not produce a maze where the end is unreach-
                   able, such as the one shown in Figure 10-8(d).




168   Chapter 10
                 Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




 S                          S                           S                           S




                   E                          E                          E                               E

         (a)                         (b)                         (c)                           (d)

Figure 10-8: Three overly simple mazes and one unsolvable maze

                      Beyond the exciting commercial opportunities involved in designing
                  children’s place mats, the maze-generation algorithm in this section shows
                  how we can extend the basic components of minimum spanning trees and
                  Kruskal’s algorithm. Further, it demonstrates how randomization can be
                  used within an algorithm to create different spanning trees.


     Single-Linkage Hierarchical Clustering
                  We can also adapt Kruskal’s algorithm to handle the seemingly different
                  problem of clustering spatial points. Clustering is a common unsupervised
                  data-mining and machine-learning approach that assigns data points
                  to clusters such that the points within each cluster are similar (for some
                  given definition of similar). For example, we might cluster cafés based on
                  geographic proximity so that all the coffee shops in Anchorage are placed
                  together in one cluster, while cafés in Honolulu are placed in another. The
                  resulting clusters provide a partitioning of data points that can help us dis-
                  cover structure in the data or classify similar data points.
                       There is a wide range of clustering techniques that vary in how they
                  define similar points and how points are assigned to clusters. As its name
                  implies, hierarchical clustering is an approach that creates a hierarchy of
                  clusters by merging two “nearby” clusters at each level of the hierarchy.
                  Each data point initially defines its own cluster; these clusters are iteratively
                  joined until all the points are part of the same cluster. Even within hierar-
                  chical clustering, there are various approaches to determining which clus-
                  ters to merge, including the following:
                  •    Computing the mean position over each cluster’s points and merging
                       the clusters with the closest centers
                  •    Finding the farthest of any pair of points from two clusters and merg-
                       ing the clusters whose maximum distance is the smallest
                  •    Finding the closest pair of points from two clusters and merging the
                       clusters whose minimum distance is the smallest
                      This section focuses on the last approach, called single-linkage clustering,
                  which joins the two clusters with the closest pair of individual points. We



                                                                                Minimum Spanning Trees   169
                   Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                   present an algorithm to implement it that is nearly identical to Kruskal’s
                   algorithm on graphs.
                       Figure 10-9 shows an example of single-linkage clustering. The left-hand
                   figure shows the five two-dimensional points (0, 0), (1, 0), (1.2, 1), (1.8, 1),
                   and (0.5, 1.5). The right-hand figure shows the hierarchical clustering.


                   2                                     2

                              4                          3

                                                         4
                   1                    2    3
                                                         0

                                                         1

                   0   0           1
                       0            1            2
                                   (a)                              (b)

                   Figure 10-9: A set of two-dimensional points (left) and
                   the corresponding single-linkage clustering (right)

                        We start with each point in its own cluster and create a merged cluster
                   from the two individual points with the closest distance (points 2 and 3).
                   Next, we merge the cluster {2, 3} with {4} because points 2 and 4 have the
                   smallest distance of any pair of points in different clusters. This process
                   continues as shown in the right-hand side of Figure 10-9.
                        The advantage of hierarchical clustering is that it provides an easily
                   visualized and interpretable structure. We can use this structure to dynami-
                   cally change the number of clusters (level of partitioning) by walking up
                   the hierarchy until we hit a given distance threshold. Points that have been
                   joined together before we hit the threshold are clustered together, while
                   clusters that have not been merged remain disjoint.

                   The Code
                   To simplify the logic of the clustering code, we define two small helper
                   classes that store information about the points and the resulting clustering
                   links. First, to represent the two-dimensional points we are clustering, we
                   define a Point class to store the coordinates and compute pairwise distances:

                   class Point:
                       def __init__(self, x: float, y: float):
                           self.x: float = x
                           self.y: float = y

                           def distance(self, b) -> float:
                               diff_x: float = (self.x - b.x)
                               diff_y: float = (self.y - b.y)
                               dist: float = math.sqrt(diff_x*diff_x + diff_y*diff_y)
                               return dist


170   Chapter 10
Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




      The distance() function computes the Euclidean distance in two-
 dimensional space and requires us to include import math at the start of the
 file in order to use the math library’s square root function. (Appendix A
 further discusses creating graphs from spatial points, including the use of
 alternative distance functions.)
      Second, since we are not using an explicit graph, we also define a Link
 data structure to hold the connection between points in the same cluster:

 class Link:
     def __init__(self, dist: float, id1: int, id2: int):
         self.dist: float = dist
         self.id1: int = id1
         self.id2: int = id2

     This data structure is effectively identical to an undirected graph
 edge. It stores a pair of identifiers for the points and the distance (weight)
 between them. We define it here as an independent data structure to
 highlight the fact that we do not need to explicitly build a graph for single-
 linkage clustering.
     Using these two helper data structures, we can then implement the
 single-linkage hierarchical clustering algorithm using an approach based
 on Kruskal’s algorithm:

 def single_linkage_clustering(points: list) -> list:
     num_pts: int = len(points)
     djs: UnionFind = UnionFind(num_pts)
     all_links: list = []
     cluster_links: list = []

   1 for id1 in range(num_pts):
         for id2 in range(id1 + 1, num_pts):
             dist = points[id1].distance(points[id2])
             all_links.append(Link(dist, id1, id2))

   2 all_links.sort(key=lambda link: link.dist)

     for x in all_links:
       3 if djs.are_disjoint(x.id1, x.id2):
             cluster_links.append(x)
             djs.union_sets(x.id1, x.id2)

     return cluster_links

      The code takes a list of Point objects (points) to cluster. The function
 starts by creating a series of helper data structures, including a UnionFind
 data structure representing the disjoint sets (djs) to determine which points
 already belong to the same cluster, an empty list (all_links) to hold all
 pairwise distances, and an empty list (cluster_links) to hold the Link objects
 representing each merge. The code then uses a nested pair of for loops
 to iterate through all pairs of points 1. For each pair, the code computes
 the distance using the points’ distance function and creates a Link data

                                                               Minimum Spanning Trees   171
                           Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




                           structure to hold this distance information. After all the pairwise distances
                           are computed, the code sorts the links in order of increasing distance 2.
                                Next, another for loop iterates over each edge in the sorted list, using
                           the UnionFind data structure to check whether the next pair of points is
                           already in the same cluster 3. If not, the program adds the link to ­cluster
                           _links, joining the two clusters that contain those points, and merges the
                           disjoint sets for the points.
                                Finally, the code returns the list of Link objects representing the cluster-
                           ing. Each Link represents a connection between two previously disjoint clus-
                           ters. The links in cluster_links will be ordered by increasing distance, so the
                           first element represents the first two points merged.

                           An Example
                           Figure 10-10 shows the steps of our clustering algorithm on the points from
                           Figure 10-9. The left column of the figure shows the current clusters as con-
                           nected graph components of the two-dimensional points. The right column
                           of the figure shows the same clusters as merged points in the hierarchy with
                           each cluster represented as a circle.


      2                                                            2
                                         2                                                    2
                                         3                                                    3
(a)   1                                  4                   (b)   1                          4

                                         0                                                    0
                                         1                                                    1
      0                                                            0
           0           1          2                                    0      1        2



      2                                                            2
                                         2                                                    2
                                         3                                                    3
(c)   1                                  4                   (d)   1                          4
                                         0                                                    0
                                         1                                                    1
      0                                                            0
           0           1          2                                    0      1       2

Figure 10-10: Single-linkage clustering

                               In Figure 10-10(a), the algorithm has joined the closest two points—
                           those at (1.2, 1) and (1.8, 1)—into a single cluster. Using the points’ labels
                           from Figure 10-9, we call these points 2 and 3, respectively.
                               In the next step, in Figure 10-10(b), the algorithm joins the two clusters
                           with the closest pair of points. At this stage, the closest points are (1.2, 1)
                           and (0.5, 1.5) with a distance of approximately 0.86. Since (1.2, 1) is already
                           part of a cluster, the algorithm merges the entire cluster with the one



172       Chapter 10
       Graph Algorithms the Fun Way (Sample Chapter) © 2024 by Jeremy Kubica




        containing the single point (0.5, 1.5). The resulting cluster contains three
        points {2, 3, 4}.
             The algorithm continues in Figure 10-10(c) by creating a new merged
        cluster from the two remaining individual points (0, 0) and (1, 0). The
        algorithm has now created two separate clusters with three and two points,
        respectively. During the final step, in Figure 10-10(d), these two clusters are
        merged by adding a link between the closest pair of points from each clus-
        ter (1.2, 1) and (1, 0).
             Since single-linkage clustering grows the clusters by linking increas-
        ingly distant pairs of points, we can use this distance as a stopping thresh-
        old for the algorithm. For example, if we set the maximum distance to 0.95,
        we would produce the three distinct clusters shown in Figure 10-10(b).


Why This Matters
        The minimum spanning tree problem allows us to solve a range of real-
        world optimization problems, from building roads to designing communi-
        cation networks. Within the field of computer science, we can use minimum
        spanning trees to help solve a range of problems in networking, clustering,
        and analysis of biological data. For example, we can represent a communi-
        cation network as a graph and find the minimum spanning tree to inform
        which links need to be upgraded to ensure that all nodes are reachable
        through the new technology.
            We can also apply the same basic approach to problems we might not
        normally think of as graph based. Using a variation of Kruskal’s algorithm,
        we can search for structure in real-valued datasets by building clusters of
        similar data points or design solvable mazes by introducing randomization
        into the algorithm to create novel solutions. In single-linkage clustering, we
        use the distances to determine which points are similar.
            The next chapter expands on this discussion, introducing algorithms
        that help us identify the nodes and edges that are essential to maintain-
        ing connectivity.




                                                                      Minimum Spanning Trees   173
