The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy




                     7
                     
                ROUND SHAPES

LEGO isn’t a medium inherently suited to building round                         115
shapes. After all, it’s a system based on a regular square
grid that consists primarily of rectangular elements. Despite
this, there are many wonderful LEGO creations that feature
organically curving forms. In this chapter, we’ll look at
some techniques for building round shapes like cylinders,
circular walls, domes, and even spheres.
                                     The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      CH AP T ER 7

            We’ll also consider what’s possible using LEGO’s limited range of rounded elements, but our
        main focus will be on how to use regular bricks and plates to create the best possible approx-
        imation of a curve. The result is never perfect, and the limitations of the LEGO medium are
        always apparent in the jaggedness and gaps that you may see, especially when you look at
        your model up close. The trick is to create a convincing illusion of a round shape, at least when
        viewing your model from a few steps back.



        CURVED LEGO ELEMENTS
        The LEGO catalog includes a selection of round bricks, plates, and tiles. Specialized pieces are
        also available for creating round walls, hollow cylinders, and domes (see Figure 7-1). These
        pieces come in only a few different sizes, however, which limits the dimensions of the round
        structures you can build with them. For example, the biggest dome you can create using dome
        pieces has a diameter of 10 studs.

                                                        3×6×6

                                      2×4×5
                                                                                                               5×5
                                                                                              4×4
                                                                          3×3
            2×2           4×4



            85080       48092          85941            87926            88293               49612             76776
              Round bricks                 Cylinder pieces                                Dome pieces

116         Figure 7-1: A selection of LEGO round bricks, cylinder pieces, and dome pieces



             Another category of rounded LEGO elements is the curved slopes we first saw in Chapter 3.
        We can think of the sloped portion in a curved slope as the arc of a circle, and so technically,
        if we put enough of these pieces together, we should be able to form a circle. The tricky part is
        that we have to precisely position these pieces in different orientations. For that, we first need to
        use SNOT techniques to create a core that has studs facing in four different directions. We can
        then attach the curved slope pieces to the outside of this core to create a cylinder.
             This approach is much more flexible than using LEGO’s dedicated cylinder pieces, since
        you can achieve a wider variety of diameters (see Figure 7-2).




             Figure 7-2: Cylinders created by attaching curved slope pieces to a SNOT core
                The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
                                                                                                       R O UN D SH A PE S

The usual 6:5 ratio of sideways building applies, so the cylinder can be built up in height incre-
ments of 2 studs (or 5 plates).
     The smallest of these cylinders consists of 1×4 curved slope pieces (#93273) attached on
all four sides of a 4×4 square SNOT core. A 2×4 plate runs down the middle of each face of
the core, filling in the gap on the underside of each slope piece and locking all the slopes into
place (see Figure 7-3).




                                                                                   93273




                    Figure 7-3: The smallest of the cylinders used for the minarets of the Taj Mahal


    The result has a diameter of just under 6 studs, the perfect size for the minarets on my Taj
Mahal MOC (Figure 7-4). These SNOT cylinders rely on curved slopes for their rounded form.
For the rest of the chapter, however, we’ll consider what round shapes are possible using pri-
marily square and rectangular elements.




                                                                                                                            117




                                        Figure 7-4: Taj Mahal minarets created
                                        by stacking cylinders




BUILDING ROUND WALLS
Round walls are an eye-catching addition to architectural builds. For example, you can use
them to create a turret of a castle or a tholobate (also known as a drum), the cylindrical
portion of a building beneath a dome. Let’s look at a few different techniques for building
round walls.
                        The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      CH AP T ER 7

        BENDING BRICKS
        A brute-force approach to building a rounded wall is to build a straight wall using 1×2 bricks in
        a staggered bond pattern and then bend it to form a circle (see Figure 7-5). The longer your wall,
        the more flex it will have, making it easier for you to bend it into a complete circle. The number of
        1×2 bricks needed in each layer to build a stable round wall tends to be around 72. The tech-
        nique works with plates as well.




                            Figure 7-5: Bending a LEGO wall to create a round shape


             LEGO artist Jeff Sanders specializes in art created using various brick-bending techniques
        like this. His amazing creations are made not just by bending LEGO walls into simple circles
        but also by interconnecting multiple curved wall segments to form intricate patterns. Strictly
        speaking, most brick-bending techniques are illegal because you’re using LEGO elements in
        ways they aren’t intended to be used and sometimes subjecting them to undue stress and pos-
        sible damage. Another downside to this technique is that it can’t easily be replicated digitally
        in Studio.
118
        MIXING RECTANGULAR AND ROUND BRICKS
        Another approach to building round walls is to alternate between rectangular bricks (1×3 or
        1×2 bricks work well) and round 1×1 bricks in each layer. This technique is similar to brick
        bending, but the round bricks act like hinges, allowing the wall to be bent more easily (and
        legally!) into a circle. As illustrated in Figure 7-6, the method allows round walls to be built with
        smaller diameters than are possible with brick bending.




                               Figure 7-6: A round wall created by mixing 1×1 round bricks with
                               regular 1×3 bricks
                The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
                                                                                          R O UN D SH A PE S

     One downside to this technique is that the texture of the wall is uneven due to the 1×1
round bricks. However, it’s possible to cover the outer surface of the wall with tiles to hide
the round bricks, as seen in Figure 7-7.




                    Figure 7-7: Using headlight bricks instead of 1×3 bricks allows 1×4
                    tiles to be attached to the outer surface of the wall.


    Of course, adding the tiles requires SNOT building. Here I’ve replaced each 1×3 brick with
three headlight bricks with their top studs facing out. These headlight bricks are joined together
by a 1×3 plate to reach the full height of 1 brick. Meanwhile, the 1×4 tiles on the face of the
wall mimic the look of real bricks, which should work great for castle builds.

USING HINGE PLATES
In Chapter 6, we discussed how to use LEGO hinge plates to create angled walls. If we extend
this concept further, we should be able to create a continuous chain of angled wall segments,
all of the same length, that come together to form a closed shape—that is, a regular polygon.                  119
Give that polygon enough sides (say, 20 or more), and it should pass for a circular wall.

SIMPLER POLYGONS
Let’s first take a step back and see what it would take to build a simpler polygon, like a hexagon
or an octagon. Then we’ll apply what we’ve learned to making a circle. The challenge here is
that it isn’t enough to just build a polygonal structure using hinge pieces; we also need a way
to incorporate it into a LEGO model by firmly attaching it to a baseplate. To make a good con-
nection, we need at least one pair of opposite sides of the polygon to line up with the LEGO
grid, even if the rest of the sides don’t. For this reason, it’s much easier to create polygons with
an even number of sides.
     Whether a pair of sides will align depends on the mathematical relationship between the
length of each side of a regular polygon and the length of its apothem (the distance from the
center of a polygon to the center of one of its sides—see the “Polygon Geometry” box for
more information). What we need is a polygon where the side length is a whole number of
studs, and where twice the apothem (the distance between two opposite sides) is also a whole
number of studs—or close enough to a whole number, anyway.
                       The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      CH AP T ER 7


                                              POLYGON GEOMETRY
            A regular polygon is a closed shape that has n sides of equal length, where n is 3 or
            greater. The point where any two adjacent sides intersect is called a vertex, and the line
            from a vertex to the center of a polygon is called the radius. As illustrated here, the angle
            between two adjacent radii is called the central angle. An n-sided polygon’s central
            angle is equal to 360 degrees divided by n.



                                                                   Central
                                                                   angle


                                                                              Radius


                                                                        Apothem




                 The apothem is a line drawn from the center of a polygon to the center point of one
            of its sides. This line is perpendicular to the side, and twice the apothem gives you the
120         perpendicular distance between two opposite sides. A polygon’s apothem is shorter than
            its radius, but these two lines combine with half a polygon’s side to form a right triangle.
            So calculating the radius or apothem based on a polygon’s side length is a simple matter
            of trigonometry. Or you can use an online tool to make the calculation for you!


             Luckily, there are plenty of online apothem calculators that can help you figure out what
        side lengths will work for the polygon you’re trying to build. Say you want to build a hexagon.
        Start plugging in different side lengths (2, 3, 4, 5, . . .) and you’ll see that the shortest side
        length that yields (close to) a whole number for twice the apothem is 7 studs. The apothem for
        this hexagon is approximately 6 studs, making the distance between any pair of opposite sides
        about 12 studs. For an octagon, the smallest side length that works is 5 studs, and the distance
        between the opposite sides is, once again, around 12 studs. Figure 7-8 shows these two poly-
        gons, built with a mix of hinge plates and regular plates. Notice how the top and bottom sides
        of each polygon align with the LEGO grid.
                  The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
                                                                                                         R O UN D SH A PE S




    Figure 7-8: The smallest hexagon (left) and octagon (right) that can be securely attached to a LEGO baseplate


FROM POLYGONS TO CIRCLES
The same principle applies if we’re trying to approximate a circle: one pair of opposite sides
needs to align with the LEGO grid. To appear round, the polygon needs to have many sides,
and each side should be quite short. The shortest we can go is a side length of 2 studs, achieved
with two layers of 1×4 hinge plates. The hinge locations are offset by 2 studs between the
layers, as shown in Figure 7-9.




                                                                                                                              121
          Figure 7-9: Building a round wall using two layers of hinge plates



     We’re holding the side length constant, but the number of sides (that is, the number of
hinge plates) can vary based on the angle of each hinge. How many sides will work? A nice
thing about a regular polygon with a large number of sides is that we can start thinking of
its apothem as the radius of a circle, and twice the apothem as the circle’s diameter. This lets
us bypass apothem calculations and instead use the simpler formula C = πd, where C is the
circle’s circumference and d is its diameter. The circumference here (in studs) is the number of
sides times 2, and dividing that by π gives us the diameter. If the diameter is close enough to
a whole number, we’ll be able to attach the round wall to a baseplate. Some side counts that
work are 22 (diameter of 14 studs; see the left of Figure 7-10), 28 (diameter of 18 studs; see
the right of Figure 7-10), 30 (diameter of 19 studs), and 36 (diameter of 23 studs; see the left
of Figure 7-11).
                            The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      CH AP T ER 7




             Figure 7-10: Round walls with diameters of 14 (left) and 18 (right) studs

            Figure 7-11 shows how I used a round wall with a diameter of 23 studs to create the tholo-
        bate in my model of the Taj Mahal. I included a second ring of hinge plates near the top to better
        hold the individual sides together.




122



             Figure 7-11: A round wall used for the tholobate (or drum) of the Taj Mahal


        INTERNAL SUPPORT STRUCTURES
        One issue you may encounter when using this technique is that it isn’t easy to get the wall to keep
        its round shape. When there are just two connection points to the base, the rest of the hinged
        wall segments are free to move. There are ways to create an internal support framework using
        Technic elements, but it’s simpler to build an inner wall using regular bricks as close as possible to
        the round wall. You can then use SNOT techniques to attach cheese slopes, curved slopes, and
        other elements to the inner wall, filling in the gaps and helping the outer wall retain its shape.
                The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
                                                                                          R O UN D SH A PE S



                                    DIGITAL BUILDING TIP
    In Chapter 6, we discussed how to rotate elements like hinge plates for angled building in
    Studio. The same technique applies to building a round wall digitally. The key is to make
    sure each hinge plate is rotated by just the right amount or else the two ends of the wall
    won’t line up correctly and complete the circle. The angle of rotation necessary is the same
    as the central angle of the polygon. As mentioned in the “Polygon Geometry” box, this angle
    is equal to 360 divided by the polygon’s number of sides. For a round wall with 28 sides
    (diameter of 18 studs), for example, the angle would be 360/28 = 12.85 degrees. It’s best
    to enter this angle manually (as described in Chapter 6). Each hinge assembly in the round
    wall needs exactly the same angle of rotation, so once you’ve rotated one hinge plate, copy
    and paste the hinge assembly (both halves together) as many times as needed to complete
    the circle.




BUILDING A SPHERE
A classic challenge in the LEGO world is using regular bricks and plates to get as close as pos-
sible to building a sphere. Spheres (or partial spheres) can have a wide range of applications
in LEGO builds to create everything from a globe or a soccer ball to the dome of a building like
the Taj Mahal.

STACKED BRICKS                                                                                                 123
One way to build a LEGO sphere is to stack layers of regular bricks, all with the studs facing
up. Each layer is essentially an approximation of a circle. Start with the middle layer, the widest
part of the sphere, and build out symmetrically from there, creating successively narrower
“circles” above and below until you reach the top and bottom of the sphere. The question then
becomes: For each layer of the sphere, how do you best approximate a circle?

APPROXIMATING A CIRCLE
It turns out LEGO builders aren’t the only ones facing a dilemma in trying to create round
forms out of square building blocks. The Minecraft community, too, has to navigate this
challenge, and they’ve developed some resources that are readily adaptable to LEGO. For
example, Minecraft enthusiasts often use a circle chart like the one shown in Figure 7-12.
                           The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      CH AP T ER 7



                15             16              17             18               19                20        21




                      22                  23                  24                    25                26




                 27                     28                      29                       30                31




             Figure 7-12: A Minecraft circle chart



             A circle chart shows the best way to approximate a two-dimensional (2D) circle of various
        diameters by placing blocks (or pixels) in a square grid. The bigger the diameter, the more
        convincing is the illusion of the round shape. Consulting a chart like this, you could determine
        the ideal footprint of each layer of your LEGO sphere. Or, if that sounds a bit tedious, you can
        use Plotz (https://www.plotz.co.uk), an online 3D modeling assistant for Minecraft, to automate
        this process. With its Sphere tool, you just enter the sphere diameter you need, and presto, a
124     sphere is generated for you, with 3D and 2D views showing how to build the sphere layer by
        layer (see Figure 7-13).
             Getting from a Plotz model to an actual LEGO sphere still requires some thought. The
        sphere generator shows individual Minecraft blocks, the equivalent of 1×1 LEGO bricks, but
        you can’t simply stack a bunch of 1×1s the way you see in the 3D view. You need to convert
        the 1×1s into longer bricks to form an interlocked structure that holds together well. You also
        need to make the walls of the sphere at least 2 studs deep, allowing each successive layer to
        rest on the layer immediately below it. Alternating the orientation of the bricks from one layer
        to the next, as discussed in Chapter 3, will yield the strongest result.
                   The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
                                                                                                            R O UN D SH A PE S




    Figure 7-13: A sphere generated by Plotz, with a 3D and 2D view of the highlighted layer



MAINTAINING THE CORRECT PROPORTIONS
There’s one last hitch. Minecraft blocks are perfect cubes, but 1×1 LEGO bricks, of course, are
not. If you replace all the blocks in the Plotz model with LEGO bricks, your sphere will end up a
little taller than it is wide—just like a 1×1 brick. Thankfully, Plotz also has an Ellipsoid tool, and
you can use that to compensate for LEGO proportions. This tool lets you set the height, width,
and depth of the 3D shape separately, as opposed to the single Size controller in the Sphere tool.
      The key is to set the width and depth of the ellipsoid to your desired LEGO sphere diameter (in
studs), and then set the height to five-sixths that diameter. For example, the left half of Figure 7-14
shows a Plotz ellipsoid with a width and depth of 24 units and a height of 20 units. The right half                              125
of the figure shows this ellipsoid translated into LEGO.




    Figure 7-14: A Plotz ellipsoid (left) and the equivalent sphere built by stacking LEGO bricks (right)
                           The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      CH AP T ER 7

           Since a 1×1 brick has a height-to-width ratio of 6:5, the LEGO equivalent of a 5:6 ellipsoid
        works out to be perfectly spherical. The ratios cancel each other out.

        STACKED PLATES
        A sphere made from stacking bricks inevitably looks a little blocky. If we stack thinner LEGO
        plates rather than bricks, is it possible to smooth out the curves? To find out, we can go back to
        the Plotz ellipsoid generator and adjust the dimensions. Since a plate is one-third the height of
        a brick, a 1×1 plate has a height-to-width ratio of 2:5. The ellipsoid therefore needs to have the
        inverse ratio of 5:2. For example, if it’s 24 units wide and deep, it should have a height of
        60 units. Figure 7-15 shows the resulting LEGO sphere.




126         Figure 7-15: A sphere built by stacking LEGO plates


             Looking at the sphere from the side, there’s a definite improvement. The curves are less
        jagged thanks to the smaller height gradations achieved by using plates. But viewed from the
        top, the curves, once again, appear blocky. Plates still have the same basic footprint as bricks,
        so from the standpoint of width and depth, stacking plates is no better than before.
             Furthermore, another downside to building spheres via simple stacking, whether it be
        bricks or plates, is that the undersides of the pieces will be visible when you view the sphere
        from below. Ideally, a sphere should have a uniform appearance no matter how it’s oriented.
        To achieve that uniformity and smooth out the curves in all three dimensions, we need to turn to
        SNOT building.

        LOWELL SPHERES
        In 2002, Bruce Lowell revolutionized the construction of LEGO spheres by breaking them down into
        six identical curved panels built using LEGO plates. The panels are then joined together around an
        interior SNOT cube with studs in all six directions. Each panel is longer than it is wide, allowing the
        panels to interlock perfectly without any visible gaps and form a wonderfully smooth and symmet-
        rical sphere. The result, known as a Lowell sphere, after its creator, is shown in Figure 7-16.
                  The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
                                                                                            R O UN D SH A PE S




    Figure 7-16: A basic Lowell sphere


     Lowell’s original sphere had a diameter of 6.8 studs and an inner 4×4×4 core. Over time,
the technique has been generalized to other dimensions. It’s also found applications in sculpting
complex shapes other than spheres, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 9.

BRAM ’S SPHERE GENERATOR
Much of the credit for the Lowell sphere’s expansion goes to Bram Lambrecht and his online
tool Bram’s Sphere Generator (https://lego.bldesign.org). This tool can help you create a
Lowell sphere with any diameter you need. Just enter the diameter (in increments of 0.2 studs)
and tweak a few settings (such as whether to use jumper plates for even finer detail), and
you’re ready to save an LDraw file of a sphere, grouped into six panels, that can be imported                    127
into Studio. Figure 7-17 shows an example, with an individual panel on the left and the full
sphere on the right.




     Figure 7-17: A bigger Lowell sphere
                          The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
      CH AP T ER 7

             The resulting sphere is made entirely from 1×1 plates (plus 1×2 jumper plates if you’ve
        enabled that option). Therefore, as with consulting Plotz, there’s still some manual work involved
        in realizing the sphere. You have to replace the 1×1 plates with bigger pieces that can interlock
        to hold each of the six panels together as a unit, ensuring that the seams between plates don’t
        line up between successive layers of the panel. The Sphere Generator’s Use Alternating Layer
        Colors option helps with this process, making it easy to see which layer is which.
             The LDraw file also doesn’t include a SNOT core, so you’ll have to design that as well. You
        need a SNOT cube with studs in all six directions. Just a handful of connection points for each
        of the panels is usually sufficient.


                                            DIGITAL BUILDING TIP
           When you import an LDraw file from Bram’s Sphere Generator into Studio, you’ll notice
           that each of the six panels is considered a submodel. This is a collection of parts that have
           been grouped together and are treated as a unit. You can always break the submodel
           down into individual parts by right-clicking the submodel and selecting SubmodelRelease
           (selecting all the individual parts and clicking SubmodelCreate will re-create the sub-
           model), but it is also possible to edit the submodel in place by selecting SubmodelEdit.
                All six panels are identical, so once you’ve created an interlocking design for one
           instance of the submodel, you can click Return to Main Model and see that all six copies
           of the submodel have been automatically updated.




128     MODIFIED SPHERES
        With some modifications,
        Lowell spheres can be
        integrated into larger LEGO
        models as domes and other
        architectural features. For
        the rounded dome of my Taj
        Mahal model, for example,
        I started with a Lowell
        sphere with a diameter of
        27.2 studs. It consisted of
        a 16×16×16 SNOT core
        and six 14-plate-thick curved
        panels. To turn this sphere
        into a dome, I removed
        the bottom panel entirely
        and reduced the height of
                                             Figure 7-18: Truncating a Lowell sphere to form a dome
        the SNOT core by 2 studs.
        Then I cropped the bottom portions of the four side panels to create a flat bottom surface and
        planned out a fully interlocking design for each panel (Figure 7-18).
                 The LEGO Builder's Handbook (Sample Chapter) © 6/21/24 by Deepak Shenoy
                                                                                           R O UN D SH A PE S

     The panels on the front and back are oriented differently from the ones on the left and
right. Truncating the bottom portions of all four at the same level yields two unique variants of
the panels, one for the front and back and another for the left and right. Figure 7-19 shows the
final dome of the Taj Mahal in the correct color scheme and with the decorative elements added
on top, along with a breakdown of its various components.




   Figure 7-19: The dome of my Taj Mahal model


     The bottom portion of the dome, which sits on the drum (shown in Figure 7-11), ended up
having a diameter of 16 studs + 22 plates = 24.8 studs, very close to the drum’s outer diam-
eter of 25 studs.
                                                                                                                129
SUMMARY
As you’ve learned in this chapter, you don’t always need round bricks to create round LEGO
shapes. It’s possible to approximate round shapes with square (and rectangular) elements by
using techniques like brick bending, hinged polygons, and Lowell spheres. This chapter also
gave you a taste of how to use software tools like Bram’s Sphere Generator to help plan LEGO
builds. We’ll continue to explore software-assisted building in the remainder of the book as we
consider LEGO mosaics (Chapter 8) and sculptures (Chapter 9).
