                                                                                  program flow
                                                                                                                6
Program flow is about controlling the order in which your
programming blocks are run. Typically, the blocks run from
left to right, but you can control the flow of the program by
making blocks wait, repeat, or choose an action based on some
condition. The three main blocks used for program flow are the
Wait, Switch, and Loop blocks.
       You’ve already seen how the Wait block works. In this
chapter, I’ll cover the Switch and Loop blocks in depth. The
Loop Interrupt block is also used to control Loop blocks, so
I’ll explain that as well.

 N O T E The Switch and Loop blocks also have some features
that are used exclusively with data wires, which will be cov-
ered in Chapters 9 and 10.




         the switch                                              Figure 6-1: The Switch block

         block                                                              setting the condition
The Switch block (shown in Figure 6-1) lets your program         To set the condition on a Switch block, first select a sensor and
make a decision about which blocks to run. This type of struc-   mode from the Mode Selector list. Then enter the Threshold
ture is called a conditional because the program flow changes    value and any additional parameters, such as the sensor port.
based on whether a condition is met. The Switch block checks          Think of setting the mode as asking a question. The block
the condition in order to choose from two or more groups of      shown in Figure 6-1 asks the question, “Is the Touch Sensor
blocks; these are called cases. This gives your program the      pressed?” This is a yes-or-no question, so the Switch block can
ability to make a decision and react to data from the robot’s    have only two cases: the true case and the false case.
sensors. For example, the RedOrBlue program on page 74                Other questions allow for more than two answers. For
uses the reading from the Color Sensor to decide which Sound     example, the question “What color does the Color Sensor
block to run.                                                    detect?” has eight possible answers because the Color Sensor
                                                                 can detect eight values (seven colors and the No Color value).
                                                                 For this question, the Switch block can have up to eight cases.
                Resizing a Block

     The Switch and Loop blocks automatically resize when
     you drag blocks into them. You may want to adjust the
     size of a Switch or Loop block yourself to shrink a block
     after removing some of the blocks inside, to see more
     tabs of a Switch block using Tabbed View, or to make
     room for comments.
          When you click a Loop block or a Switch block case,
     a set of resizing handles appears, as shown in Figure 6-2.
     Click and drag a handle to change the size of the block.




                                                                   Figure 6-3: Color Sensor position for following a line


                                                                        To test this program, you need a dark line to follow. You
                                                                   can use black electrical tape or a black marker to mark an oval
                                                                   on a white poster board (see Figure 6-4). Your line should be
                                                                   at least an inch (3 cm) wide and needs to be much darker than
                                                                   the background.




     Figure 6-2: Resizing handles




             the
             LineFollower
             program                                               Figure 6-4: A test line made from electrical tape and poster board




 The LineFollower program is a simple line follower, where the      N O T E This program works best with smooth turns; sharp
 robot uses a Switch block to decide the direction to go in. The   corners may cause problems. The final version of the pro-
 TriBot uses the Color Sensor in Reflected Light Intensity mode    gram, presented in Chapter 19, is better at navigating
 to follow the edge of a line by adjusting the steering based on   corners.
 the Light Sensor reading.
      For this program, you need to remove the Touch Sensor                    the basic program
 bumper from the front of the TriBot and replace it with the
                                                                   The program makes the robot follow the line by constantly
 Color Sensor. The Color Sensor should be mounted so that it
                                                                   adjusting the direction in which the robot steers in order to
 points downward, as shown in Figure 6-3.
                                                                   keep the Color Sensor over the edge of the line (see Figure 6-5).
                                                                   With the Color Sensor in Reflected Light Intensity mode, the


70        Chapter 6
sensor reading tells you how much light is reflected from a
small circular area under the sensor. When the sensor is over
the white background, it will give a high reading because a large
quantity of light is reflected. When the sensor is completely over
the dark line, it will give a low reading because a small amount
of light is reflected. Between these two extremes, the reading
varies based on how much of the line is under the sensor. As the
robot moves forward, it will use the Color Sensor reading to tell
where it is relative to the edge of the line. If the robot is too far
over the line, it will steer to the left, moving it back towards the
edge. If the robot moves away from the line, it will steer to the
right to get back to the edge.




                                                                        Figure 6-6: The LineFollower program



                                                                             Now you just need to configure the settings for each block.
                                                                        Let’s discuss how to decide on a value for each setting.

                                                                                   selecting the color sensor
                                                                                   threshold
                                                                        How should we determine the Threshold value to use for the
                                                                        Switch block? To make the TriBot follow the edge of the line,
Figure 6-5: The Color Sensor over the edge of the line                  you’ll need to find the value that the Color Sensor reads when
                                                                        it’s on the edge of the line. Figure 6-7 shows the Color Sensor
     The program uses a Switch block to choose between two
                                                                        readings I get when I place the TriBot at five positions, moving
Move Steering blocks, one of which steers to the left and the
                                                                        from off the line to over the line. A simple but reliable approach
other to the right. Figure 6-6 shows the completed program.
                                                                        to get a reasonable Threshold value is to take the average of
The entire program is within a Loop block, which keeps the
                                                                        the high (completely off the line) and low (completely over the
program running until you stop it. The Switch block reads the
                                                                        line) values. Using the values from Figure 6-6 results in a
Color Sensor and decides which Move Steering block to run.
                                                                        Threshold value of (92 + 13) / 2, which I’ll round down to 52
The Move Steering block on the upper section (the true case)
                                                                        and use that as the Switch block’s Threshold value. Note that
steers the TriBot to the left, and the one on the lower section
                                                                        this is close to the value I got when I placed the TriBot over edge
(the false case) steers it to the right.
                                                                        of the line. Your value may be a little different depending on
     Now let’s create the program:
                                                                        the sensor, the test pad, and the lighting in the room.
1.   Create a new project named Chapter6.
                                                                        7.   Set the Switch block’s Threshold parameter. The block
2.   Create a new program named LineFollower.                                should now look like this:

3.   Add the Loop block.

4.   Drag a Switch block into the Loop block (the Loop block
     will grow to fit the Switch block).

5.   Add a Move Steering block to each case of the Switch block.

6.   Select the Switch block, and set the mode to Color
     Sensor - Compare - Reflected Light Intensity.




                                                                                                                      program flow        71
      Completely off   Slightly over   Over the edge     Mostly over     Completely over
      the line         the line        of the line       the line        the line
      Reading:92       Reading: 74     Reading: 48       Reading: 28     Reading: 13         Figure 6-7: Color Sensor readings
                                                                                             at different positions



           configuring the move blocks                                          testing the program
 The two Move Steering blocks have similar settings, except            Now download and run the program to see how well it works.
 that they steer in opposite directions. The speed of the motors       You might need to adjust how fast the TriBot moves and how
 and the steering setting significantly affect how well the TriBot     sharply it turns. If you do, make sure that you make the same
 follows the line. If the Steering value is too low, the TriBot        changes to both Move Steering blocks. When it’s working, see
 won’t turn quickly enough to follow a curve in the line. If the       how much you can increase the speed and still have the robot
 Steering value is too high, the TriBot will have a lot of side-       follow the line reliably.
 to-side motion as it constantly goes from one extreme to the
                                                                                more than two choices
 other. Moving too fast makes it harder for the robot to react to
 changes in the line’s direction. Start with a Steering para­          The first version of the LineFollower program makes the TriBot
 meter of positive and negative 30 (30 and -30) and a Power            wiggle left and right while following a straight line, because the
 parameter of 25:                                                      TriBot is constantly adjusting the steering. You can make the
                                                                       motion smoother with three Move blocks: one to steer left, one
 8.   Select the Move Steering block on the upper Sequence Beam.
                                                                       to go straight, and one to steer right.
 9.   Set the mode to On.                                                    In Color Sensor - Compare - Reflected Light Intensity
                                                                       mode, the Switch block can only choose between two sets of
 10. Set the Power parameter to 25 and the Steering param-
                                                                       blocks based on the reading from the Color Sensor. To choose
     eter to -30. The block should look like this:
                                                                       between three options, you’ll need to use two Switch blocks.
                                                                       The first Switch block decides if the robot should turn to the
                                                                       left, and the second decides whether to go straight or turn to
                                                                       the right. This structure is used often in EV3 programming
                                                                       (and programming in general) to make sophisticated decisions.
                                                                             Start by making the following changes to the Line­Follower
                                                                       program:
 11. Select the Move Steering block on the lower Sequence
                                                                       13. Place a Switch block in the lower section of the existing
     Beam, and set the mode to On.
                                                                           Switch block, to the right of the Move Steering block.
 12. Set the Power parameter to 25 and the Steering para­
                                                                       14. Set the new Switch block’s mode to Color Sensor -
     meter to 30. The block should look like this:
                                                                           Compare - Reflected Light Intensity.

                                                                       15. Drag the existing Move Steering block (the one that turns
                                                                           to the right) onto the lower section of the new Switch
                                                                           block.




72      Chapter 6
16. Place a new Move Steering block on the upper section of           table 6-1: color sensor ranges and program
    the new Switch block.                                             behavior
17. Set the mode to On and the Power parameter to 25.                 Color Sensor Reading                       Program Behavior
     The Switch block should now look like Figure 6-8.                 0–31                                      Turn left

                                                                       32–72                                     Go straight

                                                                       73–100                                    Turn right


                                                                           Follow these steps to complete the program:

                                                                      18. Select the outer Switch block, and set the Threshold value
                                                                          to the lower limit of the range that should make the robot
                                                                          drive straight (which is 32, using my values).

                                                                      19. Select the inner Switch block, and set the Threshold value
                                                                          to the lower limit of the range that should make the robot
                                                                          turn right (which is 73, using my values).

                                                                           The program should look like Figure 6-9.




Figure 6-8: Setting the Threshold values for the new blocks


      You need to set the Threshold values for the two Switch
blocks so that the TriBot will go straight when it’s on the edge
of the line and turn when it moves away from the edge (by
going either too far over the line, or too far away from the line).
      Originally, I had a single Threshold value set at 52, which
is in the middle of the two extremes, 13 and 92. To get two
Threshold values, we can take the values halfway between this
middle value and the two extremes. This gives me 32 and 72.
Looking back at Figure 6-6, these values make sense because
they are close to the readings I got with the sensor mostly on
the line and mostly off the line. I’ll set the trigger values so
that the robot drives straight when the reading is between
32 and 72, and turn left or right when the reading is outside         Figure 6-9: Setting the Threshold values
that range. Table 6-1 shows how the program should behave
based on the Color Sensor reading. Be sure to calculate your
own values, as they will vary depending on the lighting and the
materials you used to mark the line.




                                                                                                                               program flow   73
  N O T E In this program, each Switch block reads the Color
 Sensor value to make its decision. This means that the                          Challenge 6-1
 sensor is read twice and the two values may not be exactly
 the same. But this shouldn’t present a problem because the            The first version of the LineFollower program chooses
 sensor value won’t change much in the time it takes the               one of two actions each time it loops: turn left or turn
 EV3 to run the two Switch blocks.                                     right. The second version made the robot drive more
                                                                       smoothly by adding a third option: going straight.
            testing the program                                        Improve the program again by adding two more cases
                                                                       so that the five options are: turn sharply left, turn
 Now when you run the program, you should notice that the
                                                                       gently left, go straight, turn gently right, and turn
 robot’s motion is much smoother as it follows a straight line.
                                                                       sharply right. You can do this by replacing the Move
 Experiment with different Threshold values and Power and
                                                                       Steering blocks that turn left and right with Switch
 Steering parameters to see how fast you can make the TriBot
                                                                       blocks that decide to turn sharply or gently based on
 move without veering off the line and getting lost.
                                                                       the reading from the Color Sensor.

            using tabbed view
 The LineFollower program uses nested Switch blocks, where

                                                                              the RedOrBlue
 one Switch block is placed within the other. Nested Switch
 blocks tend to take up a lot of room on the screen, which can

                                                                              program
 make it difficult to work with the rest of the program. To shrink
 the size of the Switch blocks, switch to Tabbed View (click the
 Flat/Tabbed Selector button). This way, the program takes up
 much less space on the screen, as you can see in Figure 6-10.
                                                                     In this section, we’ll create the RedOrBlue program, which will
                                                                     identify red and blue objects. We’ll use the IsItBlue program
  N O T E When using a Switch block in Tabbed View, I recom-
                                                                     from Chapter 5 as a starting point (Figure 6-11) because it
 mend putting all comments above the outermost Switch
                                                                     already identifies blue objects. We’ll begin by changing the
 block. Because you only see one tab at a time, comments
                                                                     program to recognize red objects, and then we’ll update it to
 inside the Switch block might get hidden. Figure 6-10 shows
                                                                     do something reasonable if the object is neither red nor blue.
 a comment for the code from our line-following program.
                                                                          The IsItBlue program is saved in the Chapter5 project, so
                                                                     the first step is to copy the program to the Chapter6 project
                                                                     and rename it.




       Flat/Tabbed View
        Selector button




 Figure 6-10: The Switch blocks as seen in Tabbed View



74       Chapter 6
 Figure 6-11: The starting point for the RedOrBlue program                              Figure 6-12: Selecting Red for the upper case



1.   Open the Chapter6 project if it’s not already open.               The yes-or-no response is reasonable for the IsItBlue
                                                                  program but isn’t quite right for a program that identifies more
2.   Open the Chapter5 project.
                                                                  colors. Change the Sound blocks so that the program says
3.   Open the Project Properties page for the Chapter5 project    “Red” for red objects and “Blue” for blue objects.
     by clicking the small wrench icon at the left side of the
                                                                  2.   Select the Sound block on the upper case and change the
     program tabs.
                                                                       sound file to Red.
4.   Select RedOrBlue in the list of programs.
                                                                  3.   Select the Sound block on the lower case and change the
5.   Click the Copy button at the bottom of the window.                sound file to Blue.

6.   Select the Chapter6 project.                                      The program should now look like Figure 6-13. When you
                                                                  run the program, it should correctly identify red or blue objects.
7.   Open the Project Properties page for the Chapter6 project.

8.   Click the Paste button. The IsItBlue program will be added            adding a new case
     to the project.
                                                                  So far, this program only really identifies blue objects, because
9.   Open the IsItBlue program and rename it to RedOrBlue.        it will declare any nonblue object to be red (because red is
                                                                  marked as the default case). In this section, you’ll modify the
10. Close the Chapter5 project.
                                                                  program to correctly identify red objects and say “Uh-oh” when
                                                                  it can’t determine an object’s color. The Switch block currently
           identifying red objects
                                                                  has two cases: one for red objects and one for blue objects. The
The lower case of the Switch block already matches blue           Add Case button, highlighted in Figure 6-14, will add a new
objects, so we’ll use the upper case to match red objects.        case to the Switch block. If you add a case and then later want
                                                                  to remove it, click the button with the small x on the right side
1.   Click the black box at the top of the Switch block and
                                                                  of the tab at the top of the case.
     choose Red, as shown in Figure 6-12.

                                                                   NOTE  The Add Case button only appears on the Switch block
                                                                  in modes where there are more than two possible cases.


                                                                                                                   program flow         75
 Figure 6-13: Identifying red or blue objects                                                 Figure 6-14: Adding a new case



       Now, back to our program:
                                                                                   Challenge 6-2
 4.    Click the Add Case button. The Switch block should look
       like Figure 6-14.
                                                                          Extend the RedOrBlue program to recognize all seven
 5.    Click the red question mark on the tab at the top of the           colors that the Color Sensor can detect.
       new case and a menu appears. Select the No Color option.

 6.    Add a Sound block to the No Color case.

 7.    Click the Sound File box and select the Uh-oh file. You’ll
       find it under the Expressions group. The program should
                                                                                 the loop
       now look like Figure 6-15.
                                                                                 block
             the default case
                                                                        The Loop block lets you repeat a group of blocks over and
 Right now, the red case is the default case in our program. This
                                                                        over. The blocks inside a Loop block are called the loop body.
 means that when none of the cases are met, the program will
                                                                        You set a condition that controls how often the loop body is
 run the blocks for the red case, and the program will say “Red”
                                                                        repeated and determines when the program moves on to the
 when the Color Sensor reads anything other than red, blue, or
                                                                        block that appears after the Loop block.
 No Color (for example, yellow or green). It makes more sense to
                                                                             The modes for the Loop block, shown in Figure 6-17,
 set the No Color case as the default. This way, the program will
                                                                        include the same sensor modes as the Switch block, plus four
 say “Uh-oh” whenever it doesn’t detect red or blue.
                                                                        additional modes:
 8.    Click the Default Case button on the No Color case.

       Figure 6-16 shows the final configuration of the Switch block.




76        Chapter 6
Figure 6-15: The No Color case                 Figure 6-16: Setting the default to No Color          Figure 6-17: Selecting the Loop block mode



     Unlimited The Loop keeps repeating until the program                    When a Loop block is in a sensor mode, the program
     ends or the loop is exited using the Loop Interrupt block         checks the sensor measurement after the loop body runs.
     (discussed below).                                                This means that the loop body is always run at least once. The
                                                                       program then decides whether to continue or leave the loop
     Count The Loop repeats for the specified number of
                                                                       based on that sensor value. It doesn’t matter what value the
     times.
                                                                       sensor reads while the loop body is running; only the sensor
     Logic A value passed into the Loop using a data wire              value measured at the end of the loop affects the program. If
     determines whether the Loop should exit. (Chapter 10              you’re not careful, this can cause your program to fail. Because
     discusses using a Loop block with a data wire.)                   the Color Sensor is only checked at the end of the loop, it’s very
                                                                       likely that the robot will move past the line without detecting it
     Time The Loop continues for the specified number of
                                                                       while the Sound block or Wait block is running. As an example,
     seconds.
                                                                       Figure 6-18 shows a flawed version of the LineFinder program
                                                                       that will often fail to find the line.




                                                                                                     Figure 6-18: A broken
                                                                                                     LineFinder program



                                                                                                                       program flow           77
            the loop
            interrupt block
 The Loop Interrupt block, shown in Figure 6-19, gives you
 another way to exit a loop. The block only has one parameter:
 the name of the loop to exit. Each Loop block has a tab at the
 top of the block that holds the name of the loop, shown in Fig-
 ure 6-20. A loop is named 01 by default; you can click the
 name to change it.




                                                                      Figure 6-21: TriBot configuration for the BumperBot3 program




 Figure 6-19: The              Figure 6-20: The Loop block name
 Loop Interrupt block


      The Loop Interrupt block shows only the first three letters
 of the name of the Loop block it will interrupt. As a result, it’s
 usually clearer to use numbers or short abbreviations for the
 loop names; otherwise, it may not be clear which loop a Loop
 Interrupt block refers to.

            the BumperBot3 program
 Now you’ll make some changes to the BumperBot2 program to            Figure 6-22: The BumperBot2 program
 learn how the Loop Interrupt block works. To use this program,
 return the TriBot to its original configuration, with the Touch
 Sensor bumper mounted on the front and the Light Color Sen-               Instead of using the Wait block to detect when the bumper
 sor on the side, as shown in Figure 6-21.                            is pressed, we’ll use a Loop block, as shown in Figure 6-23,
      The changes you’ll make will exit the loop and stop the         that repeats until the Touch Sensor is pressed. Inside the body
 program when you turn off the lights in the room. Figure 6-22        of the loop, we’ll use a Switch block in Ambient Light Intensity
 shows the part of the original program that we’ll change.            mode to check the ambient light level of the room. If the Color
 So far, the program makes the robot move forward and                 Sensor doesn’t detect enough light, the program will stop the
 wait for the Touch Sensor to be pressed. When the sensor is          motors, say “Goodbye,” and then exit the loop.
 pressed, the robot backs up, and the program loops back to                Follow these steps to create the new BumperBot3 pro-
 the beginning.                                                       gram shown in Figure 6-23:
      Now you’ll change the program to make the robot check
                                                                      1.   Copy the BumperBot2 program from the Chapter5 project
 the Color Sensor while it’s waiting. If the Color Sensor reading
                                                                           to the Chapter6 project.
 is very low, indicating that the lights have been turned off, then
 the Loop Interrupt block exits the loop and the program ends         2.   Change the name of the program to BumperBot3.
 because there are no more blocks after the Loop block.
                                                                      3.   Change the name of the main Loop block to 02.



78       Chapter 6
Figure 6-23: The BumperBot3 program




4.   Delete the Wait block.                                        8.   Set the mode of the Switch block to Color Sensor -
                                                                        Compare - Ambient Light Intensity.
5.   Add a Loop block where the Wait block was.
                                                                   9.   Set the Threshold value to 10. You can adjust this value
6.   Set the Loop block’s mode to Touch Sensor -
                                                                        after some testing if it’s too high or too low. The Loop
     Compare - State.
                                                                        block should look like Figure 6-25.
     This part of the program should now look like Figure 6-24.




Figure 6-24: Replacing the Wait block with a Loop block


     At this point, the empty Loop block does the same thing as
the Wait block it replaced: It simply waits for the Touch Sensor
to be pressed. But within the Loop block, we can now add some
blocks that will run while the program is waiting.
     The next step adds a Switch block inside the Loop block to
check the Color Sensor:
                                                                        Figure 6-25: Adding the Switch block
7.   Drag a Switch block into the Loop block.


                                                                                                               program flow        79
      When the Switch block runs, it checks the Color Sensor,            block to make the robot move forward or backward if you
 and if the light intensity is below 10, the blocks on the upper         are too close or too far away. The robot should not move if
 case will run. Now add the following blocks:                            you are in the desired range.

 10. Drag a Move Steering block to the upper case of the            2.   Use the Infrared Remote to add a pause and resume func-
     Switch block, and set the mode to Off.                              tion to the BumperBot3 program. Add a new Switch block
                                                                         that checks to see if a button on the remote is pressed.
 11. Add a Sound block after the Move block. Select Goodbye
                                                                         If it’s pressed, the program should stop the motors, wait
     from the list of sound files (it’s under LEGO Sound Files4
                                                                         for another button on the remote to be pressed, and then
     Communication).
                                                                         start the motors again. The first button acts as a pause
 12. Add a Loop Interrupt block after the Sound block. Set the           button, and the second button acts as a resume button.
     Loop Name to 02.

      Figure 6-26 shows the Loop block with these changes.
      Now when you run the program, it should say “Goodbye”
                                                                             conclusion
 and stop if the lights in the room go out. To test the program,
 you can hold the TriBot in your hand, and after the wheels start   In this chapter, you learned to use the Switch block to make
 moving, cover the Color Sensor with your other hand. When you      decisions, allowing you to choose between two or more groups of
 cover the Color Sensor, the light level drops and the program      blocks. Either by nesting Switch blocks or by adding extra cases
 should say “Goodbye” and exit.                                     to a tabbed Switch block, you can extend the number of choices.
                                                                          The other major flow control block is the Loop block, which

          further
                                                                    allows you to repeat a group of blocks until a certain condition
                                                                    is reached. Much of the power of EV3 programs comes from the

          exploration
                                                                    flexibility that’s available when configuring blocks. The condition
                                                                    usually compares a sensor reaching a set Threshold value, but
                                                                    you can also configure the Loop block to repeat for a certain
                                                                    number of repetitions or a set amount of time. The Loop Inter-
 Now that you’ve learned the nuances of the Switch and Loop
                                                                    rupt block provides another way to exit a Loop block, which gives
 blocks, here are some activities to practice using them:
                                                                    you even more flexibility to control how your program works.
 1.   Write a program that makes the robot follow you—staying             At this point, you’ve seen how to use the EV3 motors and
      close to you but not too close, say between one and two       sensors and learned about the programming blocks you need to
      feet. Use the Infrared or Ultrasonic Sensor and a Switch      build sophisticated programs. In the next chapter, you’ll use this
                                                                    knowledge to program the TriBot to find its way out of a maze.




                                                                                        Figure 6-26: Stopping the motors
                                                                                        and saying “Goodbye”




80      Chapter 6
