                        3
        How to Generate
          Electricity

             hapter 1 described why you need a closed
             loop to get current flowing through a
            circuit, and Chapter 2 showed you how
to build your own electromagnet and motor. The
projects in those chapters used electricity from a
battery, but in this chapter, you’ll make your own
electricity sources!
                      Specifically, you’ll learn how to build your own genera-
                 tor, which creates electricity from movement, and your own
                 battery, which creates electricity through chemical reactions.
                 These are two of the most common ways to obtain electricity.


                 Generating Electricity
                 with Magnets
                 When you run current through a wire, it creates a magnetic
                 field around the wire, but there’s another connection between
                 electricity and magnetism. You can also create electricity
                 using a wire and a magnet!

                 A Changing Magnetic Field Creates Electricity
                 If you move a magnet back and forth over a wire connected in
                 a closed loop, you’ll create a current in the wire. Moving the
                 magnet changes the magnetic field around the wire, and the
                 changing magnetic field pushes the electrons through the wire.




                                                             current




                                                   magnet moving
                                                    across wire



                     If you stop moving the magnet, the current also stops—
                 even if the wire is still within the magnetic field—because the
                 magnetic field is no longer changing.



44   Chapter 3
    If you connect the two ends of the wire to a light bulb and
create a closed loop, then the current can flow. Unfortunately,
however, the current created by moving a magnet over a single
wire doesn’t provide enough energy quickly enough to actu-
ally light the bulb. To light a bulb, or to power anything else,
you need to find a way to generate more power, which is the
amount of energy produced in a certain time.

How Does a Generator Work?
A generator is a device that turns movement—such as the
movement of a magnet over a wire—into electricity. To create
more power with a wire and a magnet, you can wind that
wire into a coil. The coiled wire acts like a group of wires,
and when the magnetic field passes through it, a current
flows through each coil, creating more power than you could
with a straight wire.




                                         Light bulb
                                         turns on!




                                              more
                                             current




                                    magnet moving
                                  through coil of wire




                                                       How to Generate Electricity   45
                           Creating Electricity from
                                      Water or Wind
                 If you place a coil in a magnetic field and rotate the coil
                 with a handle, you’re converting your own movement
                 into electricity. If you replaced the handle with a water
                 wheel and placed it into a stream of water, the water
                 would push the wheel so that the coil would rotate in the
                 magnetic field and create a current. This is how some
                 power plants generate electricity! The power plant just
                 lets water run through a wheel that’s connected to a
                 generator. Then this electricity is transferred, through
                 power lines, to the power outlets in people’s houses.

                                        high-pressure
                   sluice gates             water
                                                        power plant




                    water                                             generator
                                  dam
                                                                         water wheel




                     You can make electricity out of other natural forces
                 in the same way. For example, to create electricity out
                 of wind, you can connect the coil to a windmill so that
                 when the wind blows, it rotates the coil.




46   Chapter 3
Meet the Multimeter
You can measure exactly how much energy a simple generator
creates with a basic multimeter. Multimeters are handy when
building any circuit because they can measure a lot of differ-
ent values, including resistance, current, and voltage.




    The red lead is the positive lead, the black lead is the
negative lead, and the big dial in the middle lets you tell the
multimeter what to measure. If you’re having problems with a
circuit, measuring the voltage at key points in your circuit is
one practical way to figure out what’s wrong.

How to Measure Voltage
To measure voltage with a multimeter, first turn the dial to
one of the V options. (In this book, I’ll tell you which setting
to choose, but in your own projects, pick one that has a num-
ber higher than the highest voltage you expect to see in your
circuit.) Then, at the bottom of the multimeter, connect the
black lead to the COM socket and the red lead to the V socket.
Finally, place one lead on each side of the part you want to
measure the voltage across.



                                                 How to Generate Electricity   47
                     In this example, the meter is measuring the voltage
                 between the positive and negative terminals of a 9 V battery.
                 Notice that my dial is turned to 20 V, in the range showing
                 a V with a straight-line symbol. But there’s another V on the
                 multimeter with a wavy line next to it. Let’s look at what these
                 symbols mean.

                 What Are AC and DC?
                 How you set your multimeter depends on whether you want to
                 measure the voltage from a battery or a generator. A battery
                 has a positive and a negative side, but a generator doesn’t!
                 A generator has two wires that alternate between being
                 positive and negative. This is because when one side of the
                 magnet moves past the coil, current in the coil flows in one
                 direction, and when the other side of the magnet moves past
                 the coil, current flows in the other direction.
                     When the current direction switches like that, we call it
                 alternating current (AC); when the direction of the current
                 stays the same all the time, we call it direct current (DC).




48   Chapter 3
Usually, you’ll find these symbols on your multimeter to indi-
cate the AC and DC ranges of measurement:



                        AC            DC

    You need to set the multimeter to measure either AC
or DC to get the correct reading. For example, batteries have
a DC voltage.


Project #5: Make a Shake
Generator
Grab your multimeter—this project will show you how to make
a generator and measure its voltage. One quick way to create a
simple generator is to manually move a magnet back and forth
inside a coil. In this project, you’ll put a magnet inside a tube
and wind a coil around the tube. When you shake the tube, the
magnet should move back and forth inside the coil and create a
voltage.




                                                  How to Generate Electricity   49
                 Shopping List

                       insulated wire                                    plastic tube




                                                               magnets


                                             alligator clips




                 XX   Insulated solid-core wire (Jameco #36792, Bitsbox
                      #W106BK), about 9 feet. Standard hookup wire works fine.
                 XX   A small plastic tube, such as an old pen.
                 XX   Five disc magnets (Jameco #2181319, Bitsbox #HW145)
                      stacked to form a magnet rod.
                 XX   Two alligator clips (Jameco #256525, Bitsbox #CN262)
                      to connect the multimeter to the coil.


                 Tools
                 XX   A multimeter to measure the voltage of your generator.
                      The multimeter should be able to measure very low AC
                      voltages, down to 0.01 V or less. Suitable mul­timeters are
                      Jameco #2206061, Bitsbox #TL057, or Rapid Electronics
                      #55-6662. These multimeters are a bit more expensive
                      than the cheapest ones, but they will serve you for many
                      years to come.

50   Chapter 3
                                         multimeter




Step 1: Prepare Your Tube
Find a tube that’s big enough to let the magnets slide easily
back and forth. If you’re using a pen, disassemble the pen and
make sure your magnets fit inside the tube.




                                                  How to Generate Electricity   51
                 Step 2: Wind Your Coil
                 Wind about 50 turns of wire around the middle of your tube.
                 After winding, make a simple knot with the two ends to keep
                 your coil together. Then, strip the insulation from the two wire
                 ends, as shown.




                 Step 3: Connect the Multimeter
                 Connect the multimeter to both ends of the coil using alligator
                 clips and set the multimeter to measure AC. Choose the lowest
                 AC voltage setting available.




52   Chapter 3
Step 4: Shake That Thing!
Next, put the magnets inside the tube. They should fit inside
without coming apart.




     Holding the tube and multimeter leads in your hand, place
one finger on each side of the tube so that the magnets don’t
fall out. Then, shake it like you mean it!




                                                How to Generate Electricity   53
                     Observe the voltage value on the multimeter. How much
                 voltage do you get? I was able to get only 0.02 V from my gen-
                 erator, so it’s not very powerful.




                 Step 5: What If There’s No Voltage?
                 If you can’t measure any voltage from your generator, first
                 check that your multimeter leads are connected well to the
                 exposed coil wires. If you still don’t see a voltage higher than
                 0 V, make sure your multimeter is set to measure really low
                 voltages; my dial was turned to 2 V AC. You won’t get a high
                 voltage from this simple generator, so if the multimeter isn’t on
                 the lowest setting possible, it will keep reading 0 V. Note that
                 not all multimeters are able to measure such low voltages.
                      This generator isn’t very powerful right now. How can you
                 make it more powerful? Try to increase the voltage from the
                 generator by shaking it faster, adding more loops of wire to the
                 coil, or using a more powerful magnet.

                 N o t e Standard hookup wire is a bit bulky; even 50 turns
                 take up a lot of space! If you want to get a lot more turns, try
                 using magnet wire instead. It’s really thin wire with a thin
                 layer of insulating coating.




54   Chapter 3
                         Try It Out:
         Using a Motor as a Generator
  A motor already has a magnet and a coil of wire that can
  rotate in the magnet’s magnetic field. If you rotate the
  rotor with your hand, you can generate a voltage on the
  motor’s wires.
      You could create a generator by reversing the motor
  you built in Chapter 2, but the power you’d get from it
  would be too small to measure. Instead, try to find an
  old motor from a computer fan or a radio-controlled toy
  car that you don’t want to play with anymore. Then,
  set your multimeter to a low-voltage DC range, such as
  2 V DC. Attach the multimeter leads to the motor wires,
  just as you did with the shake generator, and turn the
  rotor with your fingers. Some motors have internal
  circuits that control the motor, and those circuits can
  prevent the electricity generated inside the motor from
  going out to the wires. But if you’re lucky and find a
  motor that doesn’t have such circuits, you should see a
  reading on the multimeter. Try a low-voltage AC range
  on your multimeter if you see nothing with DC.




How Do Batteries Work?
I’ve shown you how to generate electricity manually, but that
doesn’t explain how you’ve powered circuits up to this point in
the book. You’ve been using batteries, and in this section, we’ll
look at what lets those batteries create electricity.

What’s Inside a Battery?
To create a battery, you need three things:
XX   A positive electrode
XX   A negative electrode
XX   An electrolyte


                                                 How to Generate Electricity   55
                      An electrode is a wire that is used to make contact
                 with something nonmetallic, like the inside of a battery. An
                 electrolyte is a substance that can release or gain electrons.
                      Here’s how these three pieces fit inside a typical battery:


                                                      positive electrode
                                                      electrolyte

                                                      negative electrode




                     You can actually make your own battery by using a simple
                 nail for one electrode and a copper wire for the other. Stick
                 both into a lemon, and the lemon juice is your electrolyte.
                              positive electrode
                                (copper wire)
                                                                negative electrode
                                                                       (nail)


                        lack of electrons
                                                                      lots of electrons




                                                   lemon



                     The copper wire becomes the positive terminal of the
                 battery, and the nail becomes the negative terminal.

                 The Chemistry Behind Batteries
                 When you combine the lemon, the copper wire, and the nail,
                 two chemical reactions happen: one between the lemon juice
                 and the nail, and another between the lemon juice and the
                 copper wire. In the first reaction, electrons build up on the


56   Chapter 3
nail; in the second, electrons leave the copper wire. The nail
gets too crowded with electrons, and the copper wire ends up
with too few. Electrons don’t like to be in crowded places, so
the electrons on the nail want to go over to the copper wire
to even things out. But the chemical reactions with the lemon
juice are pushing the electrons the other way.
    Now, what do you think will happen if you connect a light
bulb between the nail and the copper wire? The electrons on the
nail really want to get to the copper wire, so they’ll take the
easiest path they can find, and when you create this closed-
loop circuit, they flow from the nail to the copper wire through
the light bulb. Recall that current is just electrons flowing in
a wire; if you have enough current flowing through the light
bulb, it lights up!
    After a while, the chemical reactions in the battery stop.
When this happens, the battery is dead. Some batteries can be
recharged when they die, while others must be thrown away.
The materials chosen for the electrodes and electrolyte deter-
mine whether the battery can be recharged or not.
    The batteries you buy in the store are not made of
lemons, of course! Modern batteries are made from different
materials, and scientists are always looking for new ways to
create batteries that have more energy, while being small
and lightweight.

What Determines a Battery’s Voltage?
The materials used for the electrodes and electrolyte deter-
mine the voltage you get from a battery, but the size of the
electrodes and the amount of electrolyte don’t matter when it
comes to voltage.
    To create higher battery voltages, several battery cells are
connected in series. Connecting two battery cells in series
means that you connect the positive side of one battery to the
negative side of the other. The two unconnected terminals
become the bigger battery’s new positive and negative termi-
nals, and the resulting voltage is the sum of the voltages from
the two batteries. For example, in a standard 9 V battery, you




                                                 How to Generate Electricity   57
                 have six 1.5 V battery cells, as shown. Notice that the connec-
                 tors on the outside are attached to just two terminals.




                                        9V




                 Project #6: Turn On a Light
                 with Lemon Power
                 You can make a battery out of many different things; for
                 example, in “What’s Inside a Battery?” on page 55, I showed
                 you how a lemon battery might work. In this project, you’ll
                 learn how to build a lemon battery of your own and power a
                 light with it.

                 Wa r n i n g When you’re finished with this project,
                 throw the lemons away. The chemical reactions that happen
                 with the nail and copper wire will leave the lemons unsuitable
                 for eating.


                 Meet the LED
                 A lemon battery can’t create a lot of electricity, so you need to
                 connect the battery to something that needs very little power
                 to see the effect. Most light bulbs need more power than you’ll
                 generate in this project, so let me introduce a component called
                 a light-emitting diode, or LED.




58   Chapter 3
    This little electronic component gives off, or emits, light
when you apply a little bit of power to it. LEDs come in many
colors: red, green, yellow, blue, and more. You’ll learn more
about this component in Chapter 4, and you’ll use LEDs a lot
in this book. For now, you’re just going to use an LED to see
the power generated by your lemon battery.

Shopping List


       lemons




                                                   copper wire


     alligator clips




                                          nails
                               LED



XX   Four lemons or one lemon cut into four pieces.
XX   24 inches of copper wire (any copper wire will do, but
     it’s important that the wire be copper).
XX   Four galvanized nails (most common nails for outdoor
     projects are galvanized).
XX   Two alligator clips (Jameco #256525, Bitsbox #CN262)
     for connecting the LED.
XX   A standard LED (Jameco #333973, Bitsbox #OP002 for
     just this one, or Jameco #18041, Bitsbox #K033 for a vari-
     ety pack). You’ll need several LEDs for the projects in this
     book, so order at least 10 or a variety pack.


                                                  How to Generate Electricity   59
                 Tools




                                                multimeter
                                                and leads




                                                             wire cutter



                 XX   A wire cutter (Jameco #35482, Bitsbox #TL008) to pre-
                      pare the copper wire.
                 XX   A multimeter (Jameco #2206061, Bitsbox #TL057, Rapid
                      Electronics #55-6662) to see whether your battery is work-
                      ing correctly.


                 Step 1: Prepare Your Wires
                 First, cut your copper wire into four 6-inch lengths. Strip
                 about 1 inch of insulation from both ends of each wire. These
                 will become the electrodes.




60   Chapter 3
Step 2: Insert Electrodes into a Lemon
Roll and squeeze a lemon so that you break up the small juice
packets inside it, but not enough to break the skin. Then, use
a nail to make one hole in one end, push a copper wire into
that hole, and push the nail into the other end, as shown. This
is the first lemon battery!




    Get your multimeter, set it for DC voltage measurement,
and test your lemon battery now. Place the positive test lead
on the copper wire and the negative test lead on the nail. If
everything works correctly, you should see a voltage of around
1 V on your multimeter.




                                                How to Generate Electricity   61
                 Step 3: Create Four Lemon Batteries
                 Even if you get 1 V out of your lemon, that’s not enough to
                 light an LED. Let’s create several lemon batteries so we can
                 get more electricity!
                     Just repeat the process described in Step 2 for the other
                 lemons; each will become a battery. (If you don’t have four
                 lemons to spare, you can cut one lemon into four pieces.) Now
                 you should have four lemon batteries.




                                  1     2              3            4




                 Step 4: Connect the Lemons in Series
                 To get a higher voltage with your lemon batteries, you’ll need
                 to connect them in series. To connect two lemons in series, you
                 just connect the positive side of one lemon to the negative side
                 of another. Remember, the copper wire is positive, and the nail
                 is negative.
                   negative (−)                      negative (−)


                                      positive (+)                      positive (+)




62   Chapter 3
    To wire four lemons in series, just repeat that process
a couple more times. Line your lemons up in a row with the
copper wires pointing to the right and number the lemons
from 1 to 4, beginning from the left. Connect the copper
wire from lemon 1 to the nail in lemon 2. Twist the wire
onto the nail so that the metals connect without coming
apart.
    Connect the copper wire of lemon 2 to the nail in
lemon 3, and connect the copper wire from lemon 3 to the
nail in lemon 4. This should give you a row of four lemons,
with an unconnected nail on lemon 1 and an unconnected
copper wire on lemon 4. These are the positive and negative
terminals for your big lemon battery, respectively.



               2                             3




                                         4


                   1



    When you connect batteries in series, you can add their
voltages to find your total. Four 1 V lemon batteries should
give you 4 V. If you have a multimeter, measure the voltage
between the two ends to see whether everything is connected.
You should get a voltage of around 3.5 to 4 V.




                                              How to Generate Electricity   63
                 Step 5: Test Your Lemon Battery
                 Let’s connect the LED to the lemons! Connect the long leg
                 from the LED to the copper wire, and connect the short leg
                 to the nail, as shown. The LED should now light up.




64   Chapter 3
     Lemons aren’t super powerful batteries (you’d never
see anyone with a lemon connected to their computer, for
example), so your LED will probably be very dim. After you
finish building your lemon-powered circuit, turn off the light
in your room, and you should see the LED glow.
     Remember, when you’re finished with your lemon battery,
throw the lemons away—don’t eat them!


                       Try It Out:
               More Food Batteries!
  When you’re done making lemon batteries, test to see
  whether you can make batteries out of other fruits or
  vegetables. For example, what about a potato battery?
  Are you able to get more voltage, or is it the same as the
  voltage from the lemon?



Step 6: What If Your Lemon Light Doesn’t Work?
If you can’t see light from your LED, even in a dark room,
check to see whether your LED is connected the right way.
The long leg should be connected to the positive side of the
battery, which is the copper wire.
     Make sure the lemons are connected to each other only
through the wires and nails. For example, if your lemons are
sitting in a puddle of lemon juice, they could be connected
through that. Just dry them off and move them somewhere
else. Next, check that the copper wires are properly con-
nected to the nails and that the nails and copper wires are
actually touching the juice inside the lemons. Also, check
that the nails and copper wires are not touching each other
inside any of the lemons.
     If the circuit still doesn’t work, disconnect all the lemon
batteries from each other. Then, use a multimeter to check
that each lemon battery has some voltage. Connect two lemons
in series, and check that you see a higher voltage. Connect the
third lemon, and check that the voltage has increased again.
Then, connect the fourth lemon and check that you have even
more voltage.

                                                 How to Generate Electricity   65
                     If you see a voltage but the LED doesn’t light, then you
                 probably just need some more power. Get another lemon or
                 two, create some more batteries, and connect them in series
                 with the rest.



                 What’s Next?
                 In this chapter, you learned how to create your own electric-
                 ity from magnetism and chemical reactions. You made your
                 own shake generator, and you built a lemon battery to power
                 an LED.
                      If you want to explore generators even more, I suggest
                 trying to find a dynamo from an old bike. Unlike the genera-
                 tor you built in this chapter, a dynamo is a generator that
                 gives you a DC voltage, like a battery, and dynamos are com-
                 monly used to power headlights on bikes. Cut some windmill
                 blades out of some stiff cardboard or plastic, connect them
                 to the dynamo, and see whether you can harvest energy from
                 the wind.
                      You’ve now met a few electronic components, including
                 switches, LEDs, and motors. In the following chapters, you’ll
                 learn about even more components and graduate to build-
                 ing some real electronic circuits, like lights that blink, a
                 touch-sensitive switch, and even your own electronic musical
                 instrument!




66   Chapter 3
