     SECURING NET WORKS WITH
                              3
          GR APH THEORY




            Graph theory is a powerful but often over-
            looked tool in a security analyst’s arsenal.
           A graph is a mathematical structure that
       shows relationships (called edges or connections)
between things (called nodes or vertices), and graph
theory provides a suite of algorithms for analyzing the
structure and importance of these different, often inter-
linked, relationships. As technical a topic as security
is, at its core it’s about relationships: between computers and networks,
users and systems, pieces of information, and so on. By modeling a com-
puter network or social network as a graph, you can examine the composi-
tion of the relationships to determine, for example, which computers are
integral to a business’s communications, or which employees are most
likely to forward a spam message, and to whom. Knowing which nodes
(machines or employees) pose the greatest risk allows you to intelligently
distribute your security resources.
                     This chapter starts by discussing the diverse applications of graph
                 theory to information security, then goes over the theory itself. We’ll cover
                 types of graphs, how to create them efficiently in Python, and some inter-
                 esting measurements you can perform on them. Chapters 4 through 6 then
                 walk you through applying what you’ve learned here to analyze computer
                 and social networks, the two types of network you’ll face most often as a
                 security engineer. We’ll answer questions like which computers in a network
                 received the most data, which members in a group are most influential, and
                 how quickly information is likely to spread through a social network.


     Graph Theory for Security Applications
                 Before we discuss how we can apply graph theory in practice, let’s take a
                 look at a simple travel graph example in Figure 3-1.


                           SEA                       $250                      JFK


                                              $99                 $99


                                                       ORD
                 $120     $99
                                                                              $120

                                          $132

                                                                 $140
                           LAX

                                                    $132

                                                                              MIA
                                                    $156


                 Figure 3-1: A travel graph

                      As mentioned previously, a graph is defined by nodes and edges. In this
                 example, the nodes (the circles) represent airports in major cities, and the
                 edges (the arrows) represent the cost of a plane ticket between two cities. A
                 graph like this could save you money as you plan a trip. For example, if you
                 wanted to travel from Seattle to New York, you could fly from SEA to LAX,
                 then to MIA, and finally to JFK for a total cost of $396.00. You could also fly
                 from SEA to ORD and then to JFK for $198.00, or directly from SEA to JFK
                 for $250.00.




28   Chapter 3
     I don’t know about you, but when I fly I don’t think just about the cost;
I also consider the travel time. In addition to the cost of each potential
trip, you can also use this graph to determine the smallest number of stops
between any two cities. Fewer stops means shorter trips. As you can see,
even a simple graph can contain a lot of information.
     When analyzing a computer network, the first step for both attackers
and defenders is to get “the lay of the land.” That means they can’t start
to attack or defend anything until they’ve built a graph of what’s available
around them. One way to create such a graph is to define computers as
nodes and the network connections as edges; this is typical of most network
maps. In one of the upcoming projects, we’ll model a computer network
from a raw packet capture. In this definition, the nodes will be the individ-
ual computers, and the edges will indicate when one machine sends packets
to another.
     Similarly, analyzing a social network can reveal key people and relation-
ships, like the employees who will forward spam messages, or important
members of a criminal organization. You can use that information to target
or protect members of the network (depending on your job). For example,
the FBI uses undercover agents to get information on organized crime
families, then builds a social network graph, determines the key figures,
and attempts to arrest them. Now, with the prevalence of social media, any
amateur sleuth with a laptop can build an alarmingly accurate graph of an
organization’s (or individual’s) social network and use that information to
target key members for their own means.
     Researchers also apply graph theory, using it to map technologies
like cellular networks and cloud computing. For example, scholars have
presented ways to apply shortest-path algorithms (similar to limiting the
number of airport stops in Figure 3-1) to pick secure routes through graphs
representing 5G cellular networks. The research analyzes how messages
travel from point to point in the physical layer (OSI model) of the net-
work.1 We’ll use a similar analytical model in Chapter 4 when we graph
a computer network from packet data. Other modern research has focused
on graphing the logical relationship of components hosted in the cloud.
By mapping code usage and typical hypervisor loading activities, scientists
have presented a formal way to describe cloud security concerns for virtual-
ization platforms.2
     Graph theory is also applied to open source intelligence (OSINT), which,
in short, collates publicly available information to gain intelligence about
a target. An application named Maltego crawls the public web for related
terms, email addresses, places, machines, and other details, and creates a
graph of where they appear online, like in Figure 3-2. In 2017 at DEF CON,
the annual information security convention, Andrew Hay gave an excellent
introductory presentation on applied graph theory for OSINT.




                                                Securing Networks with Graph Theory   29
                 Figure 3-2: An intelligence-gathering application of graph theory

                      Applications like Maltego blend these logically different types of
                 networks together in one graph, leading to very interesting insights. In
                 one example, my team was able to locate a covert communication chan-
                 nel between two users of different forums. Although the forums were
                 run by different companies, they resided on a shared hosting server.
                 User A joined site X while user B joined site Y. Then, by manipulating
                 the forum software, the two users were able to use local file reads and
                 writes to pass messages on the underlying server. Had my team exam-
                 ined only the social network connections, we would have been stumped,
                 but when we combined information about the social networks and the
                 underlying machine networks, we realized that both accounts could
                 access the same hardware. Of course, you don’t need to rely on other
                 people’s tools; once you know the inner workings, you can produce your
                 own OSINT-gathering tools, complete with pretty, yet functional, graph
                 displays.
                      Graphs can also be used to describe how you can go from one con-
                 dition to another by taking some action. For example, you can go from
                 somewhat secure to completely unsecured by removing the locks from
                 your doors. In this definition, secured and unsecured are called states, and
                 removing the locks is the action that changes you from one state to another,
                 known as a transition. Figure 3-3 shows such a graph, known as a state
                 machine graph, that describes the potential for an attacker to move through
                 an environment. Chapter 6 will cover state machines in detail.
                      You interpret the graph like so: if you’re on the internet, and you want
                 to take over an employee’s system at your target organization, you can try
                 phishing their customer service team. When you get a willing employee,
                 you send them a remote-controlled malicious payload. You would then be
                 on the employee system, but you might still need to perform some form of
                 privilege escalation to completely take over the system. You can also see that
                 this is just one path you could follow to achieve your objective.


30   Chapter 3
                                                      Internet


                                              OWASP                     Phishing

             End user          Injection WebApp                                      Customer
                                                                  Poison              service
        Privilege escalation                                     response
                                                                                   Remote exploit

                          Remote exploit            Injection
              Admin                                                                  Employee
                                                                                      system
                                                                    Remote
                          Web server                Database        exploit    Privilege escalation


                         Remote shell           Remote shell                          Admin
                                        Injection                    Poison
                                                                    response
                         Web account                DBAdmin

                      Privilege escalation

                                                     Poison
                         ServerAdmin                response



        Figure 3-3: A state machine graph

            Now that you have an idea of what to do with graph theory, let’s discuss
        the math behind it.


Introduction to Graph Theory
        A graph G comprises the set of nodes V and the set of edges E. Information
        travels between nodes along a set of nonrepeating edges that connect them,
        called a path. A node may forward information to any node it’s directly con-
        nected to by an edge; the receiving node is the neighbor of the sending node.
        By convention I’ll denote an edge as a tuple (u, v) containing an origin
        node u and a terminal node v, where both u and v are in V and are unique
        (not equivalent). We can write this in set notation as follows:

                                                           E ⊆ ( u, v ) ∈ V 2 ∧ u ≠ v

             Sometimes an edge in a graph points back to the same node (breaking
        my u ≠ v assumption); this is known as self-looping. For example, if you create
        a graph of function calls in a program that contains a recursive function,
        there will be an edge that leaves the recursive function and points directly
        back to it. Self-loops don’t show up too often, but when they do they compli-
        cate the analysis and require specialized algorithms, so I recommend leaving
        them alone until you’re very comfortable with the basics of graph theory.
             Depending on the type of graph, edges may be bidirectional (undirected
        graphs) or directional (directed graphs). If the direction of communication
        is important to the question at hand, use a directed graph. Otherwise, use




                                                                                            Securing Networks with Graph Theory   31
                 an undirected graph. In practical implementation, undirected graphs are
                 usually faster to work with since you assume (u, v) = (v, u). A lot of prob-
                 lem descriptions require directed edges, though. In the travel graph from
                 Figure 3-1, flying from LAX to MIA has a different cost than flying from
                 MIA to LAX, so we need to use directed edges between those two nodes
                 to capture the directional information.
                      An edge may contain edge attributes, additional pieces of information
                 beyond the two nodes it connects. Nodes may also contain additional
                 information called node attributes. When one of these attributes is used
                 in ranking a node or edge, it’s referred to as the node’s or edge’s weight,
                 and a graph with weights is called a weighted graph. In some cases you may
                 even need to add more than one edge connecting two nodes (called edge
                 multiplicity) to account for different edge attributes or weights. I’ll cover
                 edge multiplicity in its own section later in the chapter, but for now we can
                 extend the travel graph from Figure 3-1 for a simple example. Suppose we
                 find out there are multiple flights leaving SEA for LAX. We may choose
                 to add an edge for each additional flight, along with its cost as the weight.
                 Adding these edges for all city pairs would give us a sense of which airports
                 had the most travel options for our trip. We’ll use multiple edges, edge
                 attributes, and weighted graphs to inform our investigations in meaningful
                 ways in the following chapters.
                      Simple graphs are unweighted, undirected graphs containing no self-
                 looping or edge multiplicity. Nonsimple graphs (or, less commonly, pseudographs),
                 those that do contain self-loops or multiple edges, comprise the vast majority
                 of interesting graphs you’ll encounter in practice.
                      A cycle of a graph G is a nonempty subset of E that forms a path such
                 that the first node of the path corresponds to the last, and no other node
                 is repeated along the path. This is a fancy way of saying a path that forms
                 a closed loop. A self-loop is a special case of a graph cycle with a strict path
                 length of 1. A cyclic graph is one that contains at least one graph cycle. A
                 graph that is not cyclic (has no loops) is acyclic.
                      Before we go any further into the theory, let’s walk through how to
                 build one of these graph objects programmatically. In the next section we’ll
                 go over the current de facto standard library for Python graphs, NetworkX.
                 Having access to the tools in this library will help you construct the examples
                 in this book and play around with the theory at your own pace. The docu-
                 mentation for NetworkX also serves as a great reference to the theory that
                 underlies each function.


     Creating Graphs in NetworkX
                 You can use NetworkX (which contains implementations of most graph
                 algorithms) and Pyplot (a part of the Matplotlib library) to generate and
                 display an undirected graph. Listing 3-1 creates a graph with seven nodes
                 and six weighted edges, then displays it.




32   Chapter 3
1 import networkx as nx
  from matplotlib import pyplot as plt

2 G = nx.Graph() # Create the default Graph object
3 G.add_node('f') # Adds a node manually
  G.add_node('g') # Adds another node manually
4 G.add_edge('a', 'b', weight=0.6) # Will add missing nodes
  G.add_edge('a', 'c', weight=0.2) # and connecting edges
  G.add_edge('c', 'd', weight=0.1) # Weight is one type of edge attribute
  G.add_edge('c', 'e', weight=0.7)
  G.add_edge('g', 'c', weight=0.8)
  G.add_edge('f', 'a', weight=0.5)
5 pos = nx.layout.spring_layout(G, seed=42) # Try to optimize layout
  nx.draw(G, pos, with_labels=True, font_color='w')
  plt.show()

  Listing 3-1: Creating a basic weighted undirected graph

      First, we import the two libraries required to build and display the
 graph 1. (Aliasing NetworkX as nx and Pyplot as plt is a common conven-
 tion in examples online.) Then, we create a basic undirected graph with
 the NetworkX Graph constructor 2. Defining a graph in this way returns an
 empty graph (with no nodes or edges).
      To manually define the graph’s structure, or topography, we can add
 either nodes or edges. To add a node to the graph, we use the graph.add_node
 function 3 with an argument to use as an identifier (ID) for the node
 (during lookups, for example). In this case, the ID is the string literal f, but
 an ID can be any object that could act as a key to a Python dictionary (tuples,
 for instance). The graph.add_edge function, which takes two nodes and
 optional edge attributes as arguments, adds edges directly to the graph 4.
 If either a or b (or both, as in this case) doesn’t exist in the graph, NetworkX
 will helpfully add the missing node(s) before adding the edge. With
 directed graphs, the order in which you pass the nodes to graph.add_edge
 specifies the edge’s direction: the edge starts at the first node and concludes
 at the second.
      The real strength of graphs lies in their visual interpretations, as
 humans very often can detect patterns in information visually that they
 wouldn’t have found otherwise. NetworkX supports several options for
 displaying graph information, including Matplotlib and Graphviz. For
 this example, we lay out the graph with one of NetworkX’s built-in layout
 functions, nx.layout.spring_layout 5, which uses a physics model of spring
 motion to position the nodes. The nodes’ initial positions are randomly
 generated, but you can pass in the seed argument to make the image
 reproducible, which can be important if you want to share the conclusions
 from your research with others. The resulting node positions are stored in
 the dictionary pos, with structure {node ID: (x-coordinate, y-coordinate)}.
 The function nx.draw creates a plot object using these node positions,
 and Matplotlib displays the resulting figure. The additional parameters




                                                            Securing Networks with Graph Theory   33
                 to nx.draw, labels and font_color, control the look of the graph, shown in
                 Figure 3-4.




                 Figure 3-4: An undirected graph

                     If you remove the seed parameter and rerun the code your graph may
                 look different, but it’s guaranteed to be mathematically equivalent to the
                 one in Figure 3-4.
                     Now that we have a way to codify and visualize graphs, let’s look at some
                 interesting measurements you can use in your analysis.


     Discovering Relationships in Data
                 In this section, we’ll examine a few of the most-used graph properties that
                 can give us insight into the underlying relationships in our data. These
                 properties are expressed as statistical relationships, such as the ratio of the
                 number of possible paths between two nodes to the total number of paths
                 in the graph. Typically we’re interested in learning things like which nodes
                 are isolated from other nodes, what are the shortest or longest possible
                 paths between nodes, and how many different nodes can be reached from
                 a particular starting node. There are dozens of possible graph properties
                 to explore, but some are suitable only for certain types of graphs, while
                 others are specialized use cases of these more general properties. The ones
                 described here will give you everything you need to understand the projects
                 in the next three chapters, but it’s by no means a complete list.




34   Chapter 3
       Measuring Node Importance
       A key concept in security is measuring the importance of different assets,
       be they human or machine, and the impact that compromising them may
       have on the operation of the organization as a whole. To do so, we need a
       way to measure which nodes are in critical positions. Closeness measures the
       connectivity of two nodes relative to the other connections in the graph.

NOTE   Closeness can have many interpretations. In Chapter 11 we’ll look at how to use
       physical closeness (the distance between two objects in a physical space) to plan inci-
       dent response. By selecting security personnel who are already in the vicinity of an
       incident, you can drastically reduce the reaction time in a lot of cases.

            When you apply closeness across all nodes in the graph, you’re measur-
       ing some type of centrality (roughly, “importance”) for each node. There
       are several types of centrality defined for graphs. The proper one to use
       depends on the behavior and structure of the network you’re trying to ana-
            3
       lyze. Sometimes you won’t know in advance which measure of centrality
       makes the most sense for your problem. In these cases, start with simpler
       metrics (like closeness centrality) and move on to testing with other, more
       complex ones. We’ll cover two types of centrality: betweenness centrality
       and degree centrality.

       Finding Nodes That Facilitate Connections
       Betweenness centrality considers nodes that connect other nodes together as
       more central to the graph. Consider a computer network like the one in
       Figure 3-5, where some systems act as proxies to connect users to databases.




       Figure 3-5: A simple proxy network

            Betweenness centrality rates the gray proxy nodes much higher than any
       of the other nodes (the users and databases), since five of the seven users
       must connect to one of the two proxies to reach either database. The light
       gray circle at the top is between six paths (3 users × 2 databases = 6 paths)

                                                               Securing Networks with Graph Theory   35
                 and the dark gray circle at the bottom is between four paths (2 users × 2 data-
                 bases = 4 paths). The centrality is further strengthened by the fact that these
                 five users must pass through their respective proxy to reach the databases.
                      Formally speaking, betweenness centrality of a node u is the sum of
                 ratios of all shortest paths from node s to node t, which pass through
                 node u (noted as σ(s, t)(u)), compared to the total number of shortest paths
                 between node s and node t (noted as σ(s, t)) for all paths where s ≠ u ≠ t.
                 Putting it all together looks like this:
                                                                  σ (u)
                                              Betweenness (u) = ∑ σ(s,t)
                                                                   s≠u≠t   (s,t)


                      The betweenness scores can be normalized to the number of nodes in
                 G. The normalization function is 2 / ((n – 1)(n – 2)) for undirected graphs,
                 and 1 / ((n – 1)(n – 2)) for directed graphs (where n is the number of nodes
                 in the graph). The difference is due to the impact of directionality on the
                 normalization. For undirected graphs, adding an edge between two nodes
                 affects the betweenness score of both nodes and therefore carries twice as
                 much influence as the same edge in a directed graph that impacts only one
                 node (the source node). The normalization scores for both a directed and
                 an undirected graph with five nodes each are calculated as follows:
                                                            2      2
                                            undirected =         = = 0.166
                                                         ((4)(3)) 12
                                              directed =    1      1
                                                                 = = 0.083
                                                         ((4)(3)) 12
                     Unlike some other measures of centrality (such as closeness centrality),
                 normalizing betweenness centrality is optional in NetworkX, and is speci-
                 fied by the Boolean keyword argument normalized=True. Listing 3-2 shows
                 how we can retrieve the betweenness centrality scores for the map gener-
                 ated in Listing 3-1.

                 b_scores = nx.betweenness_centrality(G, normalized=True)
                 nx.set_node_attributes(G, name='between', values=b_scores)
                 print(G.nodes["c"]["between"])

                 Listing 3-2: Betweenness centrality for the graph created in Listing 3-1

                     The normalized result for the example graph should be approximately 0.8.
                 There are a total of 15 shortest paths between all node pairs in Figure 3-4
                 (excluding pairs with c as the start or end node). Of those 15, 12 paths pass
                 through c at some point (12 / 15 = 0.8). The Jupyter notebook for this example
                 shows how you can manually calculate the betweenness score by looping over
                 the node pairs and counting the number of shortest paths that contain the
                 target node.

       NOTE      The mathematical definition of betweenness centrality just shown and the algorithm
                 used by NetworkX to compute the betweenness centrality score are both from a paper by
                 mathematician Ulrik Brandes, which has a lot of useful information on the theory of
                 closeness and betweenness.

36   Chapter 3
     Betweenness centrality has many applications within information
security and network analysis because it represents the degree to which a
node facilitates communication between other nodes. For example, a node
in a computer network with high betweenness centrality would have more
control over the network traffic, because more packets will eventually pass
through it. For this reason, betweenness centrality can also be used to
identify good places to perform inspections on network traffic. Another
application is understanding critical points of failure in social networks,
which we’ll discuss more in Chapter 6.

Measuring the Number of Node Connections
Centrality can also be measured by how many neighbors a node has; this
is known as degree centrality. Intuitively, degree centrality favors nodes
that have a larger number of connections to other nodes in the graph.
(Betweenness centrality can be seen as a specific measure of degree
centrality.)
     For undirected graphs, degree centrality is calculated as the fraction of
all nodes that are connected directly to a node u. You’ll commonly see the
neighbors of a node u annotated as Γ(u).

                                   Degree(u) = |Γ(u)|
                                              |V|−1

     Remember from the math primer at the start of the book that the abso-
lute value of a set of nodes (|V|, for example) is the same as the number of
nodes in the set. We subtract 1 from the length of V to account for the fact
that node c cannot be a neighbor of itself. Undirected degree centrality
is calculated using nx.degree_centrality, as shown in Listing 3-3. The bold
areas show the few changes required from Listing 3-2.

d_scores = nx.degree_centrality(G)
nx.set_node_attributes(G, name='degree', values=d_scores)
print(G.nodes["c"]["degree"])

Listing 3-3: Degree centrality with changes from Listing 3-2 in bold

     The output of this code should be approximately 0.66, meaning node c
is neighbors with two-thirds of the total number of nodes in the graph. In
Figure 3-4 you can see that node c has four neighbors and, excluding c,
there are a total of six nodes that could be neighbors of c. That gives us
4 / 6 = 2 / 3 = 0.66, which matches the nx.degree_centrality result.
     For directed graphs, the degree centrality measure gets split in two
pieces. The first deals with edges leading into a node, aptly named in-degree
centrality. The second measure deals with edges leading out of a node,
called out-degree centrality. The calculation for each is the same as for degree
centrality, except that it considers only the subset of edges matching the
specified direction. We denote these sets of edges as

                                      ( u → )  = E( u, )


                                                           Securing Networks with Graph Theory   37
                   for out-degree and

                                                        ( u ← )  =  E( ,u )

                   for in-degree. Listing 3-4 creates a directed version of the graph from
                   Listing 3-1, then calculates in-degree and out-degree centrality for each
                   node in the graph.

                 1 G = nx.DiGraph() # Create the default Graph object
                   G.add_edge('a', 'b', weight=0.6)
                   G.add_edge('a', 'c', weight=0.2)
                   G.add_edge('c', 'd', weight=0.1)
                   G.add_edge('c', 'e', weight=0.7)
                   G.add_edge('g', 'c', weight=0.8)
                   G.add_edge('f', 'a', weight=0.5)
                 2 i_scores = nx.in_degree_centrality(G)
                 3 o_scores = nx.out_degree_centrality(G)
                   nx.set_node_attributes(G, name='in-degree', values=i_scores)
                   nx.set_node_attributes(G, name='out-degree', values=o_scores)
                   print(G.nodes["c"]["in-degree"], G.nodes["c"]["out-degree"])

                   Listing 3-4: Creating a directed graph to measure in-degree and out-degree centrality

                       To make the graph directed, we replace the generator nx.Graph with
                   nx.DiGraph 1. Then, we use nx.in_degree_centrality 2 and nx.out_degree
                   _centrality 3 to get their respective measures. The result of the code should
                   be 0.33 for both values. If you examine the data, you’ll see that node c has
                   two incoming edges and two outgoing edges of the six total edges we defined.
                   For each measure, then, the math works out to be 2 / 6 = 1 / 3 = 0.33. If you
                   try running Listing 3-4 against an undirected graph, you’ll get an error of
                   the type NetworkXError, because in-degree and out-degree are specific to the
                   nx.DiGraph and nx.MultiDiGraph objects.

       NOTE        Several algorithms are implemented only for directed or undirected graphs in
                   NetworkX, so if you use a statistical measurement that isn’t supported for the type
                   of edges in your graph, you’ll need to implement the statistic for the other graph
                   type yourself. We’ll see an example of this in Chapter 6.

                        The family of degree metrics allows us to specify the direction of
                   information flow while calculating the scores, whereas both the closeness
                   and betweenness measures make assumptions about the directionality. To
                   understand why this matters, consider analyzing network traffic related to
                   a distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attack. A DDoS attack floods a network
                   or specific target machine with more traffic than it is capable of processing,
                   thereby blocking legitimate users’ access. As packets travel from one system
                   to the next, they create directed edges on the graph. A sudden increase of
                   in-degree centrality would be seen at the target nodes, which could allow a
                   script to automatically detect and respond to this threat. By including the
                   direction of information flow, you can often provide more meaningful con-
                   text to your graphs.


38   Chapter 3
Analyzing Cliques to Track Associations
Investigators use clique analysis to track the associations of different groups
who aren’t kind enough to hand out membership lists. By collecting a list of
who is talking to whom (and sometimes when), you can find interconnected
clusters, or cliques. In theory, a clique β in graph G is any subset of V in which
each node is adjacent to each other node in the set. Think of this as a group
of friends who have all met each other, or a cluster of computers that are all
connected. Some material may refer to these constructs as complete subgraphs.
Figure 3-6 shows an undirected graph containing different cliques.




Figure 3-6: A cartoon character graph

    A node may be in zero or more cliques. In the graph in Figure 3-6, for
example, Tom is in three cliques: Tom, Spike, and Jerry; Tom, Butch, and
Jerry; and Tom, Squeek, and Butch. Listing 3-5 creates the graph from
Figure 3-6 and calculates a clique membership score for each node.

clique_graph = nx.Graph()
clique_graph.add_edges_from(
    [
        ("Tom", "Jerry"),("Butch", "Jerry"),("Spike", "Jerry"),
        ("Spike", "Tom"),("Tom", "Squeek"),("Tom", "Butch"),
        ("Squeek", "Butch")
    ]
)
clq = nx.algorithms.number_of_cliques(clique_graph)
tot = nx.algorithms.graph_number_of_cliques(clique_graph)
for m in clq:
    print(m, (clq[m]/tot))

Listing 3-5: Creating the cartoon clique graph in Figure 3-6

                                                         Securing Networks with Graph Theory   39
                     The call to nx.algorithms.number_of_cliques tallies the number of cliques
                 each node belongs to, which you can use to easily find the node in the
                 most cliques. To find the total number of cliques in the graph, we use
                 nx.graph_number_of_cliques. We can then combine the number of cliques for
                 each node and the total number of cliques to create a normalized score
                 to determine which members of a network are key facilitators. The output
                 from running this example code should be:

                 {'Tom': 1.0, 'Jerry': 0.66, 'Butch': 0.66, 'Spike': 0.33, 'Squeek': 0.33}

                     Tom is in every clique, Jerry and Butch are each in two-thirds of the
                 possible cliques, and Spike and Squeek are only in one-third of the possible
                 cliques. Clearly, Tom is the best-known member of this network. In social
                 networks, like a company or an organized crime syndicate, the members in
                 the most cliques are key to facilitating the operations. If we wanted to dis-
                 rupt the activities of this organization, removing Tom would go a long way
                 toward achieving that. You can also measure clique membership in your
                 network to identify nodes that act as gateways between otherwise separate
                 parts of the network.
                     The function nx.algorithms.number_of_cliques finds the number of
                 maximal cliques to which each node belongs—that is, the largest group of
                 nodes that are all connected to one another. In undirected graphs, any two
                 adjacent nodes could be considered a clique, and, in any graph, cliques of
                 four or more nodes contain cliques of three and two nodes, so working with
                 maximal cliques takes those subcliques into account.
                     You can enumerate all the maximal cliques in a graph with the nx.find
                 _cliques function, as shown in Listing 3-6.

                 cliques = list(nx.find_cliques(clique_graph))
                 print(cliques)

                 Listing 3-6: Creating a list of cliques from a directed graph

                     The result is a Generator object, which is a built-in object type in Python 3.
                 You can either use it directly or cast it to a list. We’ll see a practical applica-
                 tion of finding cliques using nx.find_cliques in Chapter 5 when we build a
                 social network graph from posts.

                 Determining the Connectedness of the Network
                 Graphs can be connected or disconnected. A connected graph is one where
                 every node pair (u, v) has some connecting path (ρ). Therefore, a graph G
                 is disconnected if any pair of nodes (u, v) doesn’t have a connecting path (ρ)
                 using any subset of edges in E. The only way to know whether or not a graph
                 is connected is to check every pair of nodes to see if they’re disconnected.
                 We can write this out neatly using set notation and Boolean algebra:

                                                              (
                                             Disconn(G) = ∑ ρ(u,v)⊄ E > 0
                                                                  (u,v)
                                                                            )

40   Chapter 3
             A Boolean statement such as ρ(u, v) ⊄ E returns 1 if it is true and 0
       otherwise, so this equation technically counts all pairs of disconnected
       nodes. In practical implementations, we don’t need to continue searching
       all remaining pairs of G because once we discover a missing edge, we know
       it’s a disconnected graph. We can only say a graph is connected, however,
       once we’ve checked every pair of nodes and found no disconnected pairs.
       You can go through this exercise yourself with the graph from Figure 3-1
       to determine if it’s a connected or disconnected map.
             Figure 3-7 shows the graph from Figure 3-6 extended to be a discon-
       nected graph.




       Figure 3-7: A disconnected graph

             A disconnected graph is made up of two or more disparate sections
       called connected components (or just components). Formally speaking, a con-
       nected component of an undirected graph G (ϕi(G)) is a subgraph in which
       every pair of nodes (u, v) is connected by a path ρ(u, v) ∈ E (annotated
       ρ(ϕi , u, v) for a path in the ith component subgraph). Additionally, none of
       the nodes in ϕ may be connected to any additional nodes in the superset V.
       For example, the graph shown in Figure 3-7 has two connected compo-
       nents: one comprising cartoon characters, and the other comprising former
       bandmates.

NOTE   A clique can never extend beyond a single component, so you’ll often care which
       component a clique is formed in, especially when performing social network
       analysis.




                                                           Securing Networks with Graph Theory   41
                 Using Graph Edges to Capture Important Details
                 The final graph property we’ll examine is one I mentioned earlier, edge
                 multiplicity. This property is powerful once you know how to leverage the
                 flexibility it brings to your analysis. In many practical instances, like the
                 packet analysis project in the next chapter, there may be multiple edges
                 between nodes that contain valuable information we want to keep for
                 analysis.
                      For example, graphing the TCP handshake requires multiple directed
                 edges between two nodes. The connecting machine (also called the client)
                 sends a synchronization request to the target machine (a SYN packet), which
                 creates one directed edge from u to v in the graph. The target machine
                 then responds with an acknowledgment as well as a request of its own to
                 synchronize (a SYN-ACK packet), which creates a directed edge from v back
                 to u. (In an undirected graph, this response would count as a duplicate of
                 the first edge.) Finally, the connecting machine sends the target machine
                 its own acknowledgment packet (an ACK packet), which creates a second
                 directed edge from u to v in the graph. Figure 3-8 shows two versions of the
                 same graph data containing TCP handshakes between two different groups
                 of systems.




                 Figure 3-8: Comparing single- and multi-edge graphs

                      On the left is a standard DiGraph representation, which treats repeated
                 communications between two nodes as a single directed edge. Examining
                 this graph alone, you couldn’t determine which nodes participated in
                 a TCP handshake. On the right is a MultiDiGraph representation of the
                 same data, which retains an edge for each occurrence of communication.
                 Examining this graph, you can easily see that node c initiated a handshake-
                 like exchange with node d. Node a also initiated a handshake with node b.
                      There are two schools of thought for dealing with edge multiplicity.
                 The first school says you should summarize multiple edges based on their
                 weight ω (and potentially other attributes) into a singular edge, like so:

                                                    (u→v) = ∑ ω
                                                             ∀(u→v)




42   Chapter 3
      If the constituent edges are unweighted, the weight is the number of edges
      making up the composite:

                                 ( u → v ) ω  =  | ( u → v ) | ∈ E

      This summation must take into account the directionality of edges when
      dealing with directed graphs. (If you’re using complex values for edge
      attributes—such as ranges, which require specialized processing to
      summarize—you’ll be better off implementing your own definition of edge
      summation in a function within your code.)
           The second school of thought is to graph each edge individually and
      summarize edges only when it comes time to analyze them. Doing so allows
      you to retain more of the underlying structure. As an example, consider
      timestamp information on network packets. If you sum the edges into a
      single edge like the preceding example, you can’t see the order in which the
      edges are created. Retaining each edge allows you to order their creation by
      timestamp and look for interesting patterns, like call and response pairs in
      edges.
           There’s no generally right or wrong way to handle edge multiplicity in a
      graph. The correct approach is often a little of both schools of thought, as
      we’ll see in the next chapter.


Summary
      The power of graph theory lies in the flexible interpretation of nodes and
      edges. Do nodes represent people, computers, cities, or something else
      entirely? Do edges measure physical distances or intangible relationships?
      The answer to all these questions is yes. Be warned, though: this freedom of
      perception is a double-edged sword. Because there are no strict definitions
      of what a node or edge represents, you can create a graph whose edges and
      analysis have no meaningful relationship to reality. An example would be
      using nodes that represent computers and edges that represent the physical
      distance between two cities where the computers are located. We typically
      don’t think about how far a message travels on the internet in terms of physi-
      cal distance, but rather in terms of the number of network “hops” it has
      to make before reaching its destination. Over the next three chapters, I’ll
      explain the justification for different interpretations of information in more
      depth, because the meaning of a result, such as closeness centrality, relies on
      the meaning of an edge’s weight and needs a bit of context to make sense.
           There’s a lot more useful theory than what I’ve covered here. The book
      Introduction to Graph Theory by Richard Trudeau (Dover, 2001) is an excel-
      lent resource.4 If you’re looking for a more advanced discussion, check
      out Graph Theory and Complex Networks: An Introduction by Maarten van
      Steen (author, 2010).5 Both books make the topics easy to understand and
      the math easy to follow. For something more security focused, check out




                                                               Securing Networks with Graph Theory   43
                 the paper “Applied Graph Theory to Security: A Qualitative Placement
                 of Security Solutions within IoT networks,” published in the Journal of
                 Information Security and Applications in December 2020, which uses graph
                 theory to analyze the security of IoT network devices and determine suit-
                 able locations for monitoring device traffic.6
                      In the next two chapters, we’ll put these theoretical concepts to work
                 by examining both a computer network and a human social network to
                 learn which nodes are important to the network, what information is being
                 exchanged, and other important insights about the underlying graph struc-
                 ture. The final graph theory project, in Chapter 6, will give you the tools
                 you need to simulate changes to a network over time. Once you understand
                 the concepts and interpretations, the insights you can gain will make graph
                 theory one of the most powerful and versatile weapons in your analytical
                 arsenal.




44   Chapter 3
