    Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith




                                  5
             T H E L AY E R S O F A P C B




            PCBs are more than just copper; they consist
            of multiple layers that each serve a differ-
           ent function. This chapter introduces several
        layer types, from stacked conductive copper
sheets that create electrical connections to solder mask,
silkscreen, mechanical features, and conceptual layers
that organize information in the design software. You’ll
then use this knowledge to build on the exercise from
Chapter 4, transforming your basic pad-only footprint
into a comprehensive component definition that incor-
porates all the necessary layers.
    In your PCB design software, the default perspective is looking straight
down through the board from the top layer. You can view a single layer at a
time, every layer, or a customized subset of layers. We’ll discuss the different
kinds of layers in a PCB design with that perspective in mind.
                      Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

     Signal Layers
                 Signal layers are sheets made of conductive material, typically copper,
                 that allow you to solder components to the board and route connections
                 between them. PCBs are sometimes called printed wiring boards (PWBs),
                 which gives you a better sense of signal layers’ primary use: replacing the
                 physical wires between components with pathways known as traces.
                      Signal layers are drawn with positive polarity, meaning anything shown
                 on that layer in the design tool will be copper on the finished board (see
                 Figure 5-1). Most PCBs are manufactured using a subtractive process for sig-
                 nal layers: The layer starts completely covered with copper, and then copper
                 is removed from all areas except those specified in the design. Within the last
                 decade, PCBs have increasingly been built with additive technology like 3D
                 printing, which adds material only where it’s needed and thus reduces waste.

                 D




                                 A




                                             B
                             C
                                                                      E

                 Figure 5-1: A signal layer, with copper areas shown in black

                     The signal layer shown in Figure 5-1 includes several typical features
                 (which we’ll revisit in Chapter 8):
                 •   Pads for surface-mount (A) and through-hole (B) components. The
                     pads of a component footprint are the exposed, conductive, solderable
                     areas that will be used to attach pins to the PCB.
                 •   Mounting holes (C). Most or all of the copper defining a hole will be
                     removed during drilling, unless the hole is also plated (used to electrically
                     tie the board to the chassis). We’ll discuss this in more detail in Chapter 8.
                 •   Traces connecting components together (D).
                 •   Polygons (E), which are larger areas of copper that help distribute power
                     and dissipate heat.


74   Chapter 5
            Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

            Signal layers normally come in pairs. Simple PCB designs use two or
       four signal layers. Extremely complex boards might use 20 or more. We’ll
       discuss how to determine the appropriate number in Chapter 6. A PCB is
       often described by how many signal layers it contains (for example, a board
       with four signal layers is called a four-layer board), but this doesn’t account
       for the many other layers the software uses to define it.


Solder Mask
       Solder mask is a material that is commonly used to cover the outer signal lay-
       ers of a PCB. It has several important properties. First, it gives the PCB its
       visible color. The most common color is green, but many others are avail-
       able as well. Some companies use different solder mask colors to distinguish
       between different versions of a PCB: prototype versus production, normal
       versus extended temperature range, or assembled with leaded versus lead-
       free solder. Others use a color that matches the company’s branding. Using
       a PCB manufacturer’s default color will generally result in the lowest cost
       and fastest fabrication time, especially for small-quantity orders.
            Second, solder mask is nonconductive, so covering two adjacent traces
       with solder mask won’t short them together electrically. It should not be
       relied on as an insulator, however. Solder mask can wear off through fric-
       tion, heat, or chemical or mechanical means. If you rest a PCB against a
       metal surface, you shouldn’t assume the solder mask will prevent shorts on
       the board.
            Third, solder mask protects the conductive copper on the PCB’s outer
       layers. Over time, those conductive surfaces can oxidize, reducing their per-
       formance. Covering them with solder mask significantly slows this process.
            Finally, the main function of solder mask is to prevent the flow of
       solder. Although solder mask doesn’t act as a thermal insulator, placing
       it between solderable areas that shouldn’t be electrically connected stops
       solder from creating a bridge that shorts those areas together. For example,
       imagine trying to solder the small-outline integrated circuit (SOIC) and
       resistor to the copper shown in Figure 5-2 without using solder mask.




       Figure 5-2: Soldering challenges without solder mask




                                                                          The Layers of a PCB   75
                      Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

                      Because the pins of the SOIC are so close together, it would be difficult
                 to solder a single pin without getting solder on the adjacent ones. Solder
                 would also flow away from the pins on the traces, risking shorts in other
                 areas and requiring more solder to ensure solid connections. Adding solder
                 mask, as shown in Figure 5-3, greatly simplifies the task by keeping solder
                 where it should be.




                 Figure 5-3: A circuit with solder mask

                     Openings in the solder mask define exposed conductors for compo-
                 nents and test points. Since solder mask covers almost all of the PCB, this
                 layer is drawn with negative polarity—that is, it shows where solder mask will
                 not be placed. Most design tools automatically generate the solder mask
                 layer based on rules set for an individual pad or the entire PCB project. The
                 main rule sets the clearance between a copper feature, such as a pad, and
                 the solder mask. Figure 5-4 shows the solder mask layer corresponding to
                 the signal layer shown in Figure 5-1.




                 Figure 5-4: The top-layer solder mask for the circuit from Figure 5-1.
                 The black areas won’t have solder mask.




76   Chapter 5
      Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

    Solder mask material is often applied over the entire PCB in liquid
form and then cured with ultraviolet (UV) light. A stencil based on the sol-
der mask layer blocks the light from areas that shouldn’t have solder mask
so that they remain liquid. Once the UV cure is complete, the remaining
solder mask is cleaned from the PCB.
    When planning the solder mask layer, you must decide how to lay it out
relative to the component footprint pads. You have two options, which are
shown below the rectangular pad and connecting trace in Figure 5-5.




NSMD




SMD




Figure 5-5: Defining component footprint pads using solder mask

     In the middle image, the dashed black line defines the opening in the
solder mask. The solderable area will be the entire copper surface of the
rectangular pad plus a small portion of the trace. Since the solderable area
is defined by the copper, not the solder mask, this approach is known as a
Non-Solder Mask Defined (NSMD) pad. Solder pools on the exposed copper
due to its high thermal conductivity, while avoiding the base laminate and
areas covered in solder mask.


                                                                    The Layers of a PCB   77
                      Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

                      The solder mask opening at the dashed white line in the bottom image
                 of Figure 5-5 indicates a Solder Mask Defined (SMD) pad, where the solder
                 mask defines the amount of exposed copper. In this case, the mask overlaps
                 the sides of the pad and covers the entire trace.
                      SMD pads are often used for very small components like 0201 and
                 01005 passives, as well as for BGAs, where you need tighter control over the
                 solderable area. The overlap of solder mask on the copper can help hold
                 those small pads in place. It also ensures that only the pad is exposed, not
                 the connecting trace as well. NSMD pads, on the other hand, tend to make
                 for stronger connections since solder covers the full surface of the pad and
                 wraps around its edges. With this approach, you can make the pad a little
                 smaller, since you don’t have to allow for the overlapping solder mask, leav-
                 ing you more room on the PCB.
                      Since the benefits of NSMD pads are more widely applicable, use them as
                 a general rule and use SMD pads only if the component datasheet calls for it.


     Silkscreen
                 Silkscreen, also called legend or overlay, marks the outer surface layers of
                 a board with useful information. The silkscreen layer goes on top of the
                 solder mask. Common silkscreen markings include reference designators
                 from the schematic; polarity marks and pin 1 identification marks to ensure
                 components are oriented correctly; and part numbers, bar codes, or corpo-
                 rate logos. Figure 5-6 shows the silkscreen corresponding to the signal layer
                 shown in Figure 5-1.




                 Figure 5-6: Silkscreen (black) for the top layer (gray)




78   Chapter 5
             Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

            Silkscreen can be used on both the top and bottom of the PCB and
       comes in a variety of colors. For the best legibility, choose a color that con-
       trasts well with the color of the solder mask (white silkscreen is popular for
       this reason). You can also improve legibility by balancing the line width and
       letter height of any silkscreened text (see Figure 5-7).




       Figure 5-7: Silkscreen legibility at various text heights
       (40, 60, 80, and 100 mils) and line widths (8, 12, 16,
       20, and 24 mils)

           Choosing a line width that’s too heavy can make the letters bleed
       together and the text hard to read, while too thin isn’t as visually appealing.


Paste Mask
       PCBs with surface-mount components are often assembled with solder paste,
       a toothpaste-like combination of powdered solder and flux paste, rather
       than spools of solid solder. Solder paste is applied to the PCB, the compo-
       nents are put into position, and the assembly is heated in a reflow oven. The
       components are initially held in place by the tacky paste and then by sur-
       face tension as it melts. As the temperature falls, the paste solidifies, leaving
       the components soldered to the PCB. We’ll discuss how to use solder paste
       in Chapter 11.
           Solder paste can be applied by hand or selectively placed by machine,
       but it’s commonly applied through a stencil that has holes where the paste
       goes. The paste mask layer uses negative polarity to define the stencil holes.
       Figure 5-8 shows the paste mask corresponding to the signal layer from
       Figure 5-1.




                                                                           The Layers of a PCB   79
                      Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith




                 Figure 5-8: The top-layer paste mask for the circuit from Figure 5-1

                     The black areas define the holes in the solder paste stencil. Placing the
                 stencil on top of the PCB and applying paste through the holes leaves sol-
                 der paste only in the areas where it’s needed.
                     The paste mask layer is an example of a design layer that isn’t used
                 directly in PCB fabrication. It’s still part of the design, though, as it defines
                 where surface-mount components will be soldered on the PCB.


     Mechanical Layers
                 Most PCB design tools allow you to add design specifics or documentation
                 using mechanical layers. For example, you could have layers dedicated to
                 design dimensions; notes on the PCB fabrication or assembly; 3D models
                 of components; or mechanical engineering input, such as drawings of the
                 desired board shape (known as the board outline), connector locations, or
                 mounting holes.
                      Mechanical layers often serve as a reference rather than part of the fin-
                 ished PCB. One exception is the board outline, which could be copied from
                 another mechanical layer or created from scratch on a dedicated layer.
                 Footprint libraries often inadvertently include information on the outline
                 layer, but nothing should exist here other than the board shape. If you have
                 a 3D model of a component on this layer, for example, the PCB manufac-
                 turer might misinterpret that information and try to cut a hole in the shape
                 of the component.


     Other Layer Types
                 Two final layers to discuss are the multilayer and keepout layers. Consider
                 the pad of a through-hole component. If it’s on a two-layer board, the pad

80   Chapter 5
             Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

        needs to go on both the top and bottom layers. Rather than having to draw
        it on both layers, you can draw it once on the multilayer layer to apply it to all
        copper layers. If you switch to a four-layer board later, the design will auto-
        matically update to include the pad on all four.
             The keepout layer also applies to all copper layers at once, but it defines
        areas where nothing can be placed. Say your design includes an induc-
        tor with high switching currents and you want to avoid coupling noise or
        inducing currents in nearby circuits. You could use the keepout layer of the
        inductor’s footprint to define an area underneath the inductor that pro-
        hibits circuits or traces on any other layer of the board. If you need to keep
        an area clear only on a specific layer or layers, you instead use a keepout des-
        ignation on the relevant layer(s). For example, if you need to keep the area
        in front of a connector clear for the mating connector to be attached, you
        would define a keepout only on the connector’s layer.
             Now that you’ve seen the various physical and conceptual layers that
        make up a PCB, let’s revisit the component footprint from Chapter 4 to see
        how it might encompass them.


Features of a Complete Component Footprint
        The quantity, size, shape, and relative positions of the pads are critical to
        ensuring a component will fit on the PCB, which is why they were the focus
        of the footprint design exercise in Chapter 4. There’s more to a component
        footprint than just the pads, however. When you define pads on a signal
        layer, they’ll generate information on the corresponding solder mask and
        paste mask layers, for example.
             You can manage the settings for these layers globally, or you can cus-
        tomize them for individual components through their pad definitions.
        The main property to define for both the solder mask and paste mask is
        the expansion, or the distance around the pad on the relevant layer. For
        example, if you set the pad size to a 20 × 30-mil rectangle with a 2-mil solder
        mask expansion, the opening in the solder mask would be 24 × 34 mils.
        That would keep solder mask 2 mils away from the pad at all points. For
        SMD pads, use negative expansion values to make the solder mask opening
        smaller than the pad itself. Setting a paste mask expansion of –2 mils for
        the same 20 × 30 pad would make the paste mask opening 16 × 26 mils. For
        guidance on setting expansion values, consult the component datasheet.

        Pin 1 Markings
        Marking pin 1 or other important pins in a component footprint can help
        ensure components are placed properly during assembly. There are several
        ways to do this. The first is by using a unique pad shape, as you did for the
        custom footprint design in Chapter 4. Surface-mount components often
        use a rectangular pad for pin 1 and rounded pads for the other pins, while
        through-hole components typically use a square pad for pin 1 and circular
        pads for the rest (see Figure 5-9).


                                                                           The Layers of a PCB   81
                      Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith




                 Figure 5-9: Unique pin 1 pads for a surface-mount (left) and
                 a through-hole (right) component

                     Another option is to use silkscreen dots or other markings to identify
                 pin 1 and a silkscreen outline to indicate the size of a component body
                 (see Figure 5-10). These features are manually added to the footprint’s silk-
                 screen layer, at the discretion of the designer, and reduce the likelihood of
                 manufacturing questions or assembly errors.




                 Figure 5-10: Marking part footprints with silkscreen

                    While silkscreen is useful for showing the 2D outline of the physical
                 component, modern PCB design tools also allow you to add 3D models.

                 3D Models
                 Using 3D models of components helps ensure sufficient clearance between
                 components and provides a more holistic view of the entire product, includ-
                 ing the assembled PCB and external elements like the housing or mating
                 connectors. Component 3D models are normally added to the PCB foot-
                 print. They can range from simple boxes indicating the maximum dimen-
                 sions to more elaborate representations of the physical part, as seen in
                 Figure 5-11.




82   Chapter 5
     Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith




Figure 5-11: Modeling PCB components in 3D

   You can build models for parts from scratch in the design tool, obtain
them from the manufacturer, or find them on third-party websites such as
3D ContentCentral.

Keepout Designations
PCB footprints might include a keepout designation. A single-layer keepout
might reserve space for a mating connector, as discussed previously, or
prevent a component’s conductive surface from shorting nearby signals.
A keepout layer (which, as already noted, applies to all copper layers) is
typically used to limit electromagnetic interference; for example, it might
define a clearance area between a conductive surface and a Bluetooth
antenna.

Other Features
Some footprints include additional information relevant to the part, per-
haps on a mechanical or documentation layer. For example, an edge-mount
connector may include a reference line on a mechanical layer indicating the
edge of the board. Embedding that information in the footprint ensures
that the part will be properly aligned. Not every footprint needs all of these
features; consult the datasheet to determine which attributes to include.




                                                                   The Layers of a PCB   83
                      Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

     Exercise 5: Complete Your Custom Footprint
                 This exercise expands on the custom footprint you started in Chapter 4,
                 adding other layers of information. Let’s assume the datasheet defines the
                 following properties for the footprint:
                 •   Pads are 1 mm wide and 0.25 mm tall.
                 •   Pitch is 0.5 mm.
                 •   Spacing between each column of pins is 3 mm.
                 •   Solder mask expansion is 0.05 mm.
                 •   Paste mask expansion is 0 mm.
                 •   Component body is 2.5 × 2 mm and 1 mm tall.
                     You already used the first three properties to create the pads. Now
                 you can update those pads to include the solder mask and paste mask
                 expansion.

                 Define the Solder and Paste Mask
                 Enter the solder and paste mask values in the pad configuration dialog as
                 shown in Figure 5-12.




                 Figure 5-12: Pad configuration

                     The manual settings option allows you to set the expansion just for this
                 component. Using the rule-based settings option instead would apply the
                 project-wide expansion settings, which are defined as a design rule (covered
                 in Chapter 9).

                 Add Silkscreen
                 You’re using a unique pad shape to designate pin 1, but you could also use a
                 silkscreened circle, arrow, or text to mark it or to convey other information.
                 Generally, you don’t need to add reference designators to the footprint
                 explicitly; the design tool will add them automatically to the silkscreen layer
                 when you place the footprint on the PCB. Make sure your silkscreen doesn’t
                 cover any copper.


84   Chapter 5
           Practical PCB Design (Sample Chapter) © 06/22/26 by Mike D. Smith

      Create a 3D Body
      Including 3D models of your components on the footprint isn’t required,
      but as noted earlier, they can help you better visualize your board and high-
      light any component clearance issues. Figure 5-13 shows two options: a basic
      box that represents the maximum component size and a more realistic
      model.




      Figure 5-13: A rough 3D body created with simple
      extrusion (left) and a more detailed model (right)

          Not all design tools have 3D capabilities. If yours does, consider add-
      ing 3D bodies to your footprints to make your finished design look more
      professional.

      Define Keepouts
      If your datasheet or your intended application calls for it, add any necessary
      keepout definitions to your footprint.


Summary
      This chapter introduced several layer types used in PCB design, including
      signal layers, solder and paste mask layers, and silkscreen. In the exercise,
      you added the layers necessary to complete the custom footprint you started
      in Chapter 4. In the next chapter, you’ll learn how to determine the opti-
      mal number and arrangement of layers to reduce manufacturing costs and
      headaches.




                                                                         The Layers of a PCB   85
