Lisp_02.book Page 129 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                                     THIS AIN’T YOUR
                                                    DADDY’S WUMPUS



                              In the previous chapter, we worked with mathematical
                              graphs in a simple game. However, as an old-school
                              geek, the first thing I think of when I see these graphs
                              is the old game Hunt the Wumpus. When I was nine, I
                              could think of nothing more fun than sitting in front
                              of my TI-99/4A and playing this excellent game.
                                  Here is the original title screen:
                                  In Hunt the Wumpus, you are a hunter
                              searching through a network of caves to
                              find a mysterious monster—the fabled
                              Wumpus. Along the way, you also deal with
                              bats and tar pits. Ah, those were the days!
                                  But, unfortunately, those days are long
                              gone. We’re in a new millennium now, and
                              no one would be impressed by these crude
                              graphics anymore. And the story line, well, let’s just say it sounds a bit corny
                              by modern standards. I think we can all agree that Hunt the Wumpus is in
                              serious need of a makeover. That’s quite a challenge, but one I think we can
                              handle.
                                  Therefore, I present to you . . .
Lisp_02.book Page 130 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




       130     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 131 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




             The Grand Theft Wumpus Game
                              In this new version of Hunt the Wumpus, you are the Lisp alien. You and the
                              Wumpus have just robbed a liquor store and made off with the loot. However,
                              during the escape, the Wumpus decides to double-cross you and run off with
                              the money and your car. But before he drives off, you manage to cap him a
                              couple of times in the kidney.




                                   Now you’re in a pretty tough situation. You don’t have a car or any money,
                              and no way to track down your former partner in crime. But you also have no
                              choice. You have your principles, so you’re going to hunt the Wumpus. You
                              know he won’t be able to get very far with his injuries. He will most likely
                              need to lie low for a few days to recover, which means he will still be some-
                              where in Congestion City. The problem is that the roads in this town are
                              impossibly convoluted, and no one can find their way around, especially an
                              out-of-towner like yourself. How are you ever going to find the Wumpus in
                              this impossible maze?




                                                                               This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   131
Lisp_02.book Page 132 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                  Luckily, being the Lisp alien, you always carry your trusty pocket com-
                              puter. Using Lisp and your graph utilities, you’re fully equipped to analyze
                              complicated data such as the Congestion City roadways and intersections.
                              Surely, you have the tools to conquer this impenetrable road system.




       132     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 133 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                   The Wumpus has been your partner in crime for a while now, so you know
                              his MO quite well. He will always carefully scout out any new hiding place
                              before he uses it. And since he is injured, any location one or two blocks away
                              (that is, one or two graph edges away) from his hiding place should be marked
                              with some telltale signs: his blood stains.
                                   A problem is that he still has his trusty AK-47, while you have only a hand-
                              gun with a single bullet. If you’re going to take him out, you’ll need to be
                              absolutely sure you’ve tracked him down. You’ll need to charge into his hide-
                              out and shoot him down immediately, and you’ll have only one chance to pull
                              this off.




                                  Unfortunately, you and the Wumpus aren’t the only criminals in this town.
                              The most feared outlaw group in Congestion City is the Gruesome Glowworm
                              Gang. These guys are a band of ruthless kidnappers. If you run into them,
                              they will kidnap you, beat you up, rob you, blindfold you, and then kick you
                              out of their car and leave you in some random part of town.
                                  Luckily, they can be avoided if you know to keep an eye out for their glow-
                              ing thoraxes (hence their name). If you see some blinking lights, you know
                              that these guys are one street away from your current location. Also, you know
                              the gang has exactly three separate teams that work the city from three sepa-
                              rate locations.




                                                                                This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   133
Lisp_02.book Page 134 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                   Finally, you still need to contend with the cops. You know they’ve proba-
                              bly set up some roadblocks in town to try to catch you and the Wumpus. You
                              should still be able to visit any location in Congestion City, but you need to
                              be careful which streets you travel. (In other words, the cops will catch you if
                              you travel along the wrong edge.) Unfortunately, you don’t know how many
                              of these roadblocks there may be.




       134     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 135 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                   As you can see, finding the Wumpus and getting back your money and car
                              will be tough. If you think you’re Lisp alien enough to take on the Wumpus,
                              then let’s write this game and hunt him down!

             Defining the Edges of Congestion City
                              The map of Congestion City will be an undirected graph with data associated
                              with each node stored in the variable *congestion-city-nodes*. The possible data
                              at each node will include the presence of the Wumpus, a Glowworm team,
                              and various danger signs.
                                   A set of edges stored in *congestion-city-edges* will connect the nodes, and
                              data linked to these edges will alert us to the presence of any police road-
                              blocks. We declare these and other global variables at the top of our pro-
                              gram using defparameter:

                              (load "graph-util")

                              (defparameter *congestion-city-nodes* nil)
                              (defparameter *congestion-city-edges* nil)
                              (defparameter *visited-nodes* nil)
                              (defparameter *node-num* 30)
                              (defparameter *edge-num* 45)
                              (defparameter *worm-num* 3)
                              (defparameter *cop-odds* 15)

                                   We first load our graph utilities with the load command , which evaluates
                              all the code in graph-util.lisp (which we created in the previous chapter) so
                              the graph utility functions will be available. Notice that Congestion City will
                              have 30 locations (nodes, defined with *node-num*), 45 edges (roads,
                              defined with *edge-num*), and 3 worm teams (defined with *worm-num*). Each
                              street will have a 1-in-15 chance of containing a roadblock (defined with
                              *cop-odds*).


                              Generating Random Edges
                              Next, we create a random list of edges to connect all the nodes:

                              (defun random-node ()
                                (1+ (random *node-num*)))

                              (defun edge-pair (a b)
                                (unless (eql a b)
                                  (list (cons a b) (cons b a))))

                              (defun make-edge-list ()
                                (apply #'append (loop repeat *edge-num*
                                                       collect (edge-pair (random-node) (random-node)))))




                                                                                 This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   135
Lisp_02.book Page 136 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                    First, we declare the random-node function , which returns a random
                              node identifier. It uses the random function, which returns a random natural
                              number less than the integer you pass to it. Since we’re going to be showing
                              the node identifiers in our user interface, we use the 1+ function to number
                              our nodes 1 through 30 (the upper limit because the *node-num* variable is set
                              to 30), instead of 0 through 29.
                                    The make-edge-list function generates the actual list of random edges.
                              It uses the loop command to loop *edge-num* times , and then collects the
                              requisite number of edges . We’ll take a closer look at the loop command in
                              the next section. The graph of the city is undirected, so this function uses a
                              helper function, edge-pair , to create two directed edges between the randomly
                              selected nodes. This extra step makes sense once you remember that an
                              undirected graph is the same as a directed graph, with two opposing directed
                              edges mirroring each undirected edge. (When we build our edges into an
                              alist later in this chapter, this step will ensure that the list is properly formed.)




                                               is
                                           equivalent
                                               to




                                    Let’s try the make-edge-list function in the CLISP REPL:

                              > (make-edge-list)
                              ((16 . 20) (20 . 16) (9 . 3) (3 . 9) (25 . 18) (18 . 25) (30 . 29) (29 . 30)
                              (26 . 13) (13 . 26) (12 . 25) (25 . 12) (26 . 22) (22 . 26) (30 . 29) (29 .
                              30) (3 . 14) (14 . 3) (28 . 6) (6 . 28) (4 . 8) (8 . 4) (27 . 8) (8 . 27) (3 .
                              30) (30 . 3) (25 . 16) (16 . 25) (5 . 21) (21 . 5) (11 . 24) (24 . 11) (14 .
                              1) (1 . 14) (25 . 11) (11 . 25) (21 . 9) (9 . 21) (12 . 22) (22 . 12) (21 .
                              11) (11 . 21) (11 . 17) (17 . 11) (30 . 21) (21 . 30) (3 . 11) (11 . 3) (24 .
                              23) (23 . 24) (1 . 24) (24 . 1) (21 . 19) (19 . 21) (25 . 29) (29 . 25) (1 .
                              26) (26 . 1) (28 . 24) (24 . 28) (20 . 15) (15 . 20) (28 . 25) (25 . 28) (2 .
                              11) (11 . 2) (11 . 24) (24 . 11) (29 . 24) (24 . 29) (18 . 28) (28 . 18) (14 .
                              15) (15 . 14) (16 . 10) (10 . 16) (3 . 26) (26 . 3) (18 . 9) (9 . 18) (5 . 12)
                              (12 . 5) (11 . 18) (18 . 11) (20 . 17) (17 . 20) (25 . 3) (3 . 25))

                                 You see the pairs of node numbers that make up the edges. This list of
                              edge pairs will form the skeleton of the Congestion City road system.

                              Looping with the loop Command
                              Our make-edge-list function employs the powerful loop command, which can
                              be used to loop over various types of data. We’ll be looking at loop in detail in
                              Chapter 10. However, our game uses loop a few times, so let’s consider some
                              simple examples to clarify how it works.




       136     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 137 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                  One handy thing you can do with loop is create a list of numbers. For
                              instance, the following command will create a list of 10 ones:

                              > (loop repeat 10
                                      collect 1)
                              (1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1)

                                  Within the loop command, we specify how many times to repeat, and then
                              specify an object to collect with every loop (in this case, the number 1).
                                  Sometimes, we want to keep a running count as we’re looping. We can
                              do this with the following syntax:

                              > (loop for n from 1 to 10
                                      collect n)
                              (1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10)

                                    In this example, we are saying that n should loop from 1 to 10. Then we
                              collect each n and return it as a list.
                                   Actually, we can put any Lisp code in the collect part of the loop. In the
                              following example, we add 100 as we do our collecting:

                              > (loop for n from 1 to 10
                                      collect (+ 100 n))
                              (101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110)


                              Preventing Islands
                              We now can generate random edges. Of course, if we just connect random
                              nodes with random edges, there’s no guarantee that all of Congestion City
                              will be connected because of all that randomness. For example, some parts
                              of the city might form an island, with no connections to the main road system.




                                                                                This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   137
Lisp_02.book Page 138 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                 To prevent this, we’ll take our list of edges, find unconnected nodes, and
                              connect these islands to the rest of the city network using this code:

                              (defun direct-edges (node edge-list)
                                (remove-if-not (lambda (x)
                                                 (eql (car x) node))
                                               edge-list))

                              (defun get-connected (node edge-list)
                                (let ((visited nil))
                                  (labels ((traverse (node)
                                             (unless (member node visited)
                                               (push node visited)
                                               (mapc (lambda (edge)
                                                       (traverse (cdr edge)))
                                                     (direct-edges node edge-list)))))
                                    (traverse node))
                                  visited))

                              (defun find-islands (nodes edge-list)
                                (let ((islands nil))
                                  (labels ((find-island (nodes)
                                             (let* ((connected (get-connected (car nodes) edge-list))
                                                     (unconnected (set-difference nodes connected)))
                                               (push connected islands)
                                               (when unconnected
                                                 (find-island unconnected)))))
                                    (find-island nodes))
                                  islands))

                              (defun connect-with-bridges (islands)
                                (when (cdr islands)
                                  (append (edge-pair (caar islands) (caadr islands))
                                          (connect-with-bridges (cdr islands)))))

                              (defun connect-all-islands (nodes edge-list)
                                (append (connect-with-bridges (find-islands nodes edge-list)) edge-list))

                                  First, we declare a utility function called direct-edges , which finds all
                              the edges in an edge list that start from a given node. It does this by creating
                              a new list with all edges removed (using remove-if-not ) that don’t have the
                              current node in the car position.
                                  To find islands, we write the get-connected function . This function takes
                              an edge list and a source node and builds a list of all nodes connected to that
                              node, even if it requires walking across multiple edges.
                                  The usual way to find connected nodes is to start a visited list , and
                              then perform a search along connected nodes, starting with the source node.
                              Newly found nodes are added to the visited list with the push command .
                              We also traverse all the children of this found node, using mapc .
                                  If, on the other hand, we encounter a node that has already been visited,
                              we know we can ignore it. Once the search is complete, the visited list will
                              consist of all connected nodes.

       138     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 139 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                    Now that we have a function for finding nodes that are connected, we
                              can use it to create a function that will find all the islands in our graph. The
                              find-islands function first defines a local function, called find-island . This
                              function checks which nodes are connected to the first node in our list of
                              nodes using the connected function. It then subtracts these nodes from the full
                              list of nodes using the set-difference function. (set-difference takes two lists,
                              and returns all items that are in the first list but not the second.)
                                    Any remaining nodes are deemed unconnected. If any unconnected
                              node exists , we call the find-islands function again recursively to find addi-
                              tional islands.
                                    Once we’ve found all the islands, we need a way of bridging them
                              together. This is the job of the connect-with-bridges function. It returns a list of
                              additional edges that join all the islands together. To do this, it takes the list
                              of islands and checks if there is a cdr in this list . If there is, it means there
                              are at least two land masses, which can be connected with a bridge. It uses the
                              edge-pair function to create this bridge, and then calls itself recursively on the
                              tail of the island list, in case additional bridges are needed.
                                    Finally, we tie all of our island prevention functions together using the
                              function connect-all-islands . It uses find-islands to find all the land masses,
                              and then calls connect-with-bridges to build appropriate bridges. It then appends
                              these bridges to the initial list of edges to produce a final, fully connected
                              land mass.

                              Building the Final Edges for Congestion City
                              To complete our edges for Congestion City, we need to convert the edges
                              from an edge list into an alist. We also will add the police roadblocks, which
                              will appear randomly on some of the edges. For these tasks, we will create the
                              make-city-edges, edges-to-alist, and add-cops functions:

                              (defun make-city-edges ()
                                (let* ((nodes (loop for i from 1 to *node-num*
                                                    collect i))
                                       (edge-list (connect-all-islands nodes (make-edge-list)))
                                       (cops (remove-if-not (lambda (x)
                                                              (zerop (random *cop-odds*)))
                                                            edge-list)))
                                  (add-cops (edges-to-alist edge-list) cops)))

                              (defun edges-to-alist (edge-list)
                                (mapcar (lambda (node1)
                                          (cons node1
                                                (mapcar (lambda (edge)
                                                          (list (cdr edge)))
                                                        (remove-duplicates (direct-edges node1 edge-list)
                                                                           :test #'equal))))
                                        (remove-duplicates (mapcar #'car edge-list))))




                                                                                  This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   139
Lisp_02.book Page 140 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                              (defun add-cops (edge-alist edges-with-cops)
                                (mapcar (lambda (x)
                                          (let ((node1 (car x))
                                                (node1-edges (cdr x)))
                                            (cons node1
                                                  (mapcar (lambda (edge)
                                                            (let ((node2 (car edge)))
                                                              (if (intersection (edge-pair node1 node2)
                                                                                edges-with-cops
                                                                                :test #'equal)
                                                                  (list node2 'cops)
                                                                edge)))
                                                          node1-edges))))
                                        edge-alist))

                                  These are the most cumbersome functions in Grand Theft Wumpus. Let’s
                              take a closer look at them.

                              The make-city-edges Function
                              First, the make-city-edges function creates a list of nodes, using a loop . (This
                              is simply a list of numbers from 1 to *node-num*.) Next, it creates a random
                              (but fully connected) edge list by calling the make-edge-list and connect-edge-
                              list functions . This result is stored in the edge-list variable. It then creates
                              a random list of edges that contains cops . We define these variables with
                              the let* command, which allows us to reference previously defined variables.
                                   The following example shows the difference between defining variables
                              with let and let*:

                              > (let ((a 5)
                                      (b (+ a 2)))
                                  b)
                              *** - EVAL: variable A has no value
                              > (let* ((a 5)
                                       (b (+ a 2)))
                                  b)
                              7

                                   As you can see, let won’t allow you to refer to other defined variables
                              (the variable b can’t reference the value of a). When defining variables with
                              let*, on the other hand, this kind of reference is allowed. For our purposes,
                              using let* allows our definition of cops to contain a reference to edge-list.
                                   Once we’ve created the edge list and determined where the cops are, we
                              need to convert our edge list into an alist and add the cops to it . The edges
                              are converted to an alist with the edges-to-alist function, and the cops are
                              added with the add-cops function.




       140     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 141 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                              The edges-to-alist Function
                              The edges-to-alist function converts a list of edges into an alist of edges. For
                              example, assume we have the following city, with only three locations and
                              two edges connecting those locations:




                                   We would describe this using an edge list as '((1 . 2) (2 . 1) (2 . 3) (3 .
                              2)). Remember that each of the edges is repeated, since the edges are undi-
                              rected and can be used in both directions. If we described this same city as an
                              alist, what would that look like?
                                   Remember that an alist is a list that lets us look up a key (in this example,
                              one of the three nodes in our city) and find the information associated with
                              that key (in this case, a list of the roads connected to it). For this small city,
                              the alist would be '((1 (2)) (2 (1) (3)) (3 (2))).
                                   To build this alist, the edges-to-list function first mapcars over the
                              nodes found in the edge list. To build the list of nodes, we use the remove-
                              duplicates function, which removes duplicate items from a list. By default,
                              remove-duplicates uses the eql function to check for equality, though it also
                              allows you to choose a different test function using the :test keyword
                              parameter. Since we’re checking for equality of cons pairs in our make-city-
                              edges function, we set :test to #'equal .
                                   Within this outer mapcar , we use another mapcar to map across all the
                              direct-edges to this node. Together, these nested mapcar functions allow edges-
                              to-alist to convert the edges of a city into an alist.

                              The add-cops Function
                              When we wrote the make-city-edges function, we randomly marked some of
                              the edges to show that they have cops on them . We are now going to use
                              this list of cop edges to mark the edges in our alist that contain cops. This is
                              the job of the add-cops function.
                                   To do this, we use nested mapcar commands to map across the edges within
                              each node         . We then check whether there are any cops on a given edge,
                              using the intersection function . (The intersection function tells us which
                              items are shared between two lists.)




                                                                                 This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   141
Lisp_02.book Page 142 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                 To understand exactly what the add-cops function is doing, it will help to
                              once again imagine our city with only three locations and two streets. In this
                              example, one of the streets has cops on it:




                                    The generated alist for this city, created by add-cops, would look like this:

                              ((1 (2)) (2 (1) (3 COPS)) (3 (2 COPS)))

                                  This is actually a nested alist. The outer alist is organized based on the first
                              node, and the inner alists are organized based on the second node.
                                  With the edges in this format, we can easily find all edges connected to a
                              given node by calling (cdr (assoc node1 edges)). To see if a given edge contains
                              cops, we can call (cdr (assoc node2 (cdr (assoc node1 edges)))), which goes down
                              two levels to grab the actual data linked to a specific edge between two nodes.
                              (One additional benefit of using this nested alist format is that it is fully com-
                              patible with our graph libraries—a feature that we’ll take advantage of shortly.)

             Building the Nodes for Congestion City
                              Now we’ll build an alist for the nodes in our city. These nodes may contain
                              the Wumpus or the Glowworms, or they might contain various clues, such as
                              blood, lights, or sirens.
                                   Most of the clues in our game are based on proximity to another node,
                              so we need to write some functions that tell us if two nodes are one node apart
                              in the city graph. The neighbors function looks up the node’s neighbors using
                              the alist of edges. If the second node is in that list, we know we’re one away.

                              (defun neighbors (node edge-alist)
                               (mapcar #'car (cdr (assoc node edge-alist))))

                              (defun within-one (a b edge-alist)
                               (member b (neighbors a edge-alist)))

                                  First, this function looks up the first node (a) in the alist of edges with
                              neighbors. Then it uses member to see if the other node (b) is among these
                              nodes.



       142     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 143 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                 The blood stain clues for the Wumpus can also be seen from two nodes
                              away. We can write a second function for checking two nodes like this:

                              (defun within-two (a b edge-alist)
                                (or (within-one a b edge-alist)
                                    (some (lambda (x)
                                            (within-one x b edge-alist))
                                          (neighbors a edge-alist))))


                                   First, we check if we are within one node of our goal , since if we’re
                              within one, we’re also within two. Next, we extract all the nodes that are one
                              away (similar to what we did in the within-one function). Finally, we check if
                              any of these new nodes are within one , which would make them within two
                              of the original node.
                                   Now that we have those utility functions, let’s write the function that builds
                              the final node alist (basically, the final map of our city.) Here’s the listing:

                              (defun make-city-nodes (edge-alist)
                                (let ((wumpus (random-node))
                                      (glow-worms (loop for i below *worm-num*
                                                        collect (random-node))))
                                  (loop for n from 1 to *node-num*
                                      collect (append (list n)
                                                      (cond ((eql n wumpus) '(wumpus))
                                                             ((within-two n wumpus edge-alist) '(blood!)))
                                                      (cond ((member n glow-worms)
                                                              '(glow-worm))
                                                             ((some (lambda (worm)
                                                                      (within-one n worm edge-alist))
                                                                    glow-worms)
                                                              '(lights!)))
                                                      (when (some #'cdr (cdr (assoc n edge-alist)))
                                                        '(sirens!))))))

                                   The make-city-nodes function first picks random nodes for the Wumpus
                              and the Glowworms , and then it uses loop to run through the node
                              numbers. As it runs through the nodes, it builds a list describing each node
                              in the city, appended together from various sources . By using append, each
                              part of the code that describes these nodes (and is within the body of the
                              append) can choose to add zero, one, or multiple items to the description,
                              creating its own child lists with zero, one, or multiple items.
                                   At the front of the list, we put the node name, n . If the Wumpus is at
                              the current node, we add the word Wumpus (but wrapped in a list, as we
                              just described). If we’re within two nodes of the Wumpus, we show its blood .
                              If the node has a Glowworm gang, we show it next , and if the Glowworm
                              gang is one node away, we show its lights . Finally, if an edge from the node
                              contains cops, we indicate that sirens can be heard .
                                   To check for the sirens clue, we simply grab the edges with (cdr (assoc n
                              edges)) and see if some of these nodes have a value in the cdr. The 'cops symbol


                                                                                  This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   143
Lisp_02.book Page 144 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                              would be attached to the edges at the cdr. Since we have only one data point
                              for edges in this game, looking for the presence of a cdr is an adequate
                              check for the presence of cops. For example, if we use our earlier example
                              of an alist with cops on it:

                              ((1 (2)) (2 (1)         (3 COPS) ) (3 (2 COPS)))

                                   You can see that if an edge in the list has cops, such as here , the cdr
                              will lead to a non-nil value. An edge without cops will have a cdr that is nil.




             Initializing a New Game of Grand Theft Wumpus
                              With our graph construction stuff out of the way, we can write a simple func-
                              tion that initializes a brand-new game of Grand Theft Wumpus:

                              (defun new-game ()
                                (setf *congestion-city-edges* (make-city-edges))
                                (setf *congestion-city-nodes* (make-city-nodes *congestion-city-edges*))
                                (setf *player-pos* (find-empty-node))
                                (setf *visited-nodes* (list *player-pos*))
                                (draw-city))

                                  There are two new functions here. One, the find-empty-node function ,
                              ensures that the player doesn’t end up on top of a bad guy right at the begin-
                              ning of the game. Here’s the code for that function:

                              (defun find-empty-node ()
                                (let ((x (random-node)))
                                  (if (cdr (assoc x *congestion-city-nodes*))
                                      (find-empty-node)
                                      x)))



       144     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 145 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                    The find-empty-node function is pretty simple. First, it picks a random
                              node to consider as the player’s starting position. Then it checks whether
                              it is a completely empty node . If there’s stuff in that node, it simply calls
                              itself again, trying another random spot .

            WARNING           If you ever decide to modify the game and make it more crowded with bad guys, you
                              could end up in a situation where no empty nodes exist. In that case, this function will
                              search forever and lock up your Lisp REPL, since we didn’t put in any checks to detect
                              this situation.
                                  The other new function in our new-game command is draw-city, which we’ll
                              write next.

             Drawing a Map of Our City
                              We’re finally ready to draw a map of our new city. We’re using a standard
                              format for our graph data, so writing this function is a breeze:

                              (defun draw-city ()
                                (ugraph->png "city" *congestion-city-nodes* *congestion-city-edges*))

                                  We created the ugraph->png function in the previous chapter, as part of
                              our graph library.
                                  Now call (new-game) from the REPL, and open the city.dot.png picture in
                              your web browser:




                   NOTE       Since every city map created by our code is unique, your map will look completely different
                              from the one in this picture.
                                    Finally, we can marvel at the results of our urban planning!




                                                                                       This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   145
Lisp_02.book Page 146 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                              Drawing a City from Partial Knowledge
                              Of course, it’s awfully boring to hunt something if you already know where
                              it is before the hunt starts. To solve this problem, we want a map of the city
                              that shows only the nodes that we’ve visited so far. To that end, we use a global
                              list called *visited-nodes* that is initially set to the player’s position only, but
                              which we’ll update as we walk around the city visiting other nodes. Using this
                              *visited-nodes* variable, we can calculate a smaller graph that includes only
                              those parts of the city that are known to us.

                              Known Nodes
                              First, we can build an alist of just the known nodes:

                              (defun known-city-nodes ()
                                (mapcar (lambda (node)
                                          (if (member node *visited-nodes*)
                                              (let ((n (assoc node *congestion-city-nodes*)))
                                                (if (eql node *player-pos*)
                                                    (append n '(*))
                                                    n))
                                              (list node '?)))
                                        (remove-duplicates
                                            (append *visited-nodes*
                                                    (mapcan (lambda (node)
                                                               (mapcar #'car
                                                                      (cdr (assoc node
                                                                                  *congestion-city-edges*))))
                                                            *visited-nodes*)))))

                                   At the bottom of known-city-nodes, we need to figure out which nodes we
                              can “see” based on where we’ve been. We’ll be able to see all visited nodes ,
                              but we also want to track all nodes within one node of a visited node . (We
                              will discuss the mapcan function shortly.) We calculate who is “within one” using
                              code similar to the previously discussed within-one function.
                                   Next, we mapcar over this list of relevant nodes, processing each . If the
                              current node is occupied by the player, we mark it with an asterisk . If the
                              node hasn’t been visited yet , we mark it with a question mark .

                              Known Edges
                              Now, we need to create an alist stripped of any cop sirens that we haven’t
                              reached yet:

                              (defun known-city-edges ()
                                (mapcar (lambda (node)
                                          (cons node (mapcar (lambda (x)
                                                               (if (member (car x) *visited-nodes*)
                                                                   x
                                                                   (list (car x))))
                                                             (cdr (assoc node *congestion-city-edges*)))))
                                        *visited-nodes*))


       146     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 147 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                   This function is similar to the known-city-nodes function. The noteworthy
                              line of code is here where we strip the cdr from the edge list for edges so
                              that cops are indicated on the map only if we’ve visited the nodes on both
                              ends of an edge containing cops.

                              The mapcan Function
                              The mapcan function we used in known-city-nodes is a variant of mapcar. However,
                              unlike mapcar, mapcan assumes that the values generated by the mapping func-
                              tion are all lists that should be appended together. This is useful when there
                              isn’t a one-to-one relationship between the items in a list and the result you
                              want to generate.
                                   For example, suppose we run a burger shop and sell three types of burgers:
                              the single, the double, and the double cheese. To convert a list of burgers
                              into a list of patties and cheese slices, we could write the following function:

                              > (defun ingredients (order)
                                   (mapcan (lambda (burger)
                                              (case burger
                                                 (single '(patty))
                                                 (double '(patty patty))
                                                 (double-cheese '(patty patty cheese))))
                                           order))
                              INGREDIENTS
                              > (ingredients '(single double-cheese double))
                              '(PATTY PATTY PATTY CHEESE PATTY PATTY)


                              Drawing Only the Known Parts of the City
                              Because we now have functions that can generate the known information
                              about nodes and edges, we can write a function that turns this information
                              into a picture, as follows:

                              (defun draw-known-city ()
                                (ugraph->png "known-city" (known-city-nodes) (known-city-edges)))

                                 Now let’s redefine our new-game function to draw the known city when the
                              game starts:

                              (defun new-game ()
                                (setf *congestion-city-edges* (make-city-edges))
                                (setf *congestion-city-nodes* (make-city-nodes *congestion-city-edges*))
                                (setf *player-pos* (find-empty-node))
                                (setf *visited-nodes* (list *player-pos*))
                                (draw-city)
                                (draw-known-city))

                                  This function is almost exactly the same as the previous version of new-game,
                              except that we also create a drawing composed only of the known parts of the
                              city .


                                                                                 This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   147
Lisp_02.book Page 148 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                  Now, if we call the new-game function from the REPL, we’ll get a new pic-
                              ture named known-city.dot.png that we can view in our browser. It will look
                              something like this:




                                    Now we’re ready to walk around our map of Congestion City!

                              Walking Around Town
                              We’ll need two functions for traveling between the nodes in our city: a regular
                              walk function and one for when we think we’ve found the Wumpus, and we
                              want to charge that location with our final bullet. Since these two functions
                              are very similar, we’ll have both of them delegate the bulk of the work to a
                              common handle-direction function:

                              (defun walk (pos)
                                (handle-direction pos nil))

                              (defun charge (pos)
                                (handle-direction pos t))

                                    The only difference between these two functions is the flag they pass to
                              handle-direction, which is set to either nil or t, depending on the kind of
                              traveling.
                                  The handle-direction function’s main job is to make sure that a move is
                              legal, which it does by checking the edges of the city:

                              (defun handle-direction (pos charging)
                                (let ((edge (assoc pos
                                                   (cdr (assoc *player-pos* *congestion-city-edges*)))))
                                  (if edge
                                      (handle-new-place edge pos charging)
                                      (princ "That location does not exist!"))))

                                  First, this function looks up the legal directions players can move to from
                              their current location . It then uses the pos the player wants to move to and
                              looks it up in that list of possible directions. Once we’ve determined that a
                              direction is legal (that is, a node with that number shares an edge with the
                              player’s current position), we need to find out what surprises are waiting as




       148     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 149 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                              the player travels to this new place, using the handle-new-place function, which
                              we’ll create next . Otherwise, we display a helpful error message .
                                  Now let’s create the handle-new-place function, which gets called when the
                              player has traveled to a new place:

                              (defun handle-new-place (edge pos charging)
                                (let* ((node (assoc pos *congestion-city-nodes*))
                                       (has-worm (and (member 'glow-worm node)
                                                      (not (member pos *visited-nodes*)))))
                                  (pushnew pos *visited-nodes*)
                                  (setf *player-pos* pos)
                                  (draw-known-city)
                                  (cond ((member 'cops edge) (princ "You ran into the cops. Game Over."))
                                        ((member 'wumpus node) (if charging
                                                                    (princ "You found the Wumpus!")
                                                                    (princ "You ran into the Wumpus")))
                                        (charging (princ "You wasted your last bullet. Game Over."))
                                        (has-worm (let ((new-pos (random-node)))
                                                    (princ "You ran into a Glow Worm Gang! You're now at ")
                                                    (princ new-pos)
                                                    (handle-new-place nil new-pos nil))))))

                                   First, we retrieve the node the player is traveling to from the alist of nodes .
                              Next, we figure out if the node contains a Glowworm gang . We ignore the
                              gang if they’re in a node already visited, because they’ll only attack once.
                                   Next, the handle-new-place function updates *visited-nodes* (adding the
                              new position to the list) and *player-pos* . Then it calls draw-known-city
                              again, since we now have a new place we know about.
                                   Next, it checks to see if there are any cops on the edge , and then whether
                              the Wumpus is at that location . If the player encounters the Wumpus, our
                              handle-new-place function needs to know whether we were charging the loca-
                              tion. If we are charging at the Wumpus, we win the game. Otherwise, the
                              Wumpus kills us and the game is over.
                                   If, on the other hand, we charge at a location that does not contain the
                              Wumpus, we waste our single bullet and we lose the game as well . Finally,
                              if the location has a previously unencountered Glowworm gang, jump to a
                              random new location, calling handle-new-place recursively .
                                   Our game is now complete!


             Let’s Hunt Some Wumpus!
                              To play our game, simply enter the traveling commands we created (walk and
                              charge) at the REPL, then switch to your browser and refresh known-city.dot.png
                              to plan your next move.




                                                                                   This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   149
Lisp_02.book Page 150 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                    For example, here’s where we left off in our sample game:




                                    Since we have no clues, we know that any of these nodes will be safe to
                              visit. Let’s try (walk 20):




                                 Uh oh! There’s blood here. That means the Wumpus must be two nodes
                              away! It should still be safe to (walk 11) though, because that’s only one
                              node away:




       150     Chapter 8
Lisp_02.book Page 151 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




                                    Oh no! One of these streets has a police roadblock. Let’s backtrack with
                              (walk 20) (walk 19), and then we can try (walk 7):




                                  Darn! Now we have the Wumpus and some Glowworms nearby. Let’s
                              take a shot in the dark and try (walk 10):




                                  Well, that didn’t help, since there are cops down this path. However,
                              because node 10 has only one other unexplored street, we can say with cer-
                              tainty that the street between 1 and 10 has cops on it.
                                  You can see that it takes some serious thinking to become a master in
                              Grand Theft Wumpus! Remember, you can always start a new game, with a
                              new map, by using the new-game function. Once you’ve tracked down the
                              Wumpus, use the charge function to attack him.
                                  If you master the basic version of this game, try increasing the number of
                              nodes, edges, cops, and Glowworms for an even greater challenge!




                                                                                   This A in’t Yo ur Daddy’s Wumpus   151
Lisp_02.book Page 152 Thursday, September 9, 2010 5:02 PM




             What You’ve Learned
                              In this chapter, we’ve used graph utilities with Lisp to make a more sophisti-
                              cated game. Along the way, you learned the following:

                              z     The loop function allows us to loop across various types of data. It will be
                                    discussed in more detail in Chapter 10.
                              z     The set-difference function tells you which items are in one list but not in
                                    another list.
                              z     The intersection function tells you which items are shared by lists.
                              z     The remove-duplicates function removes duplicate items from a list.




       152     Chapter 8
