                                4
                   A Wa t c h Winder




             If you’re a collector of automatic, or self-
             winding, watches, you’re probably famil-
            iar with watch winders and what they do.
          But why have a watch winder in a book on
Arduino microcontroller projects? The answer to
that will become increasingly clear as we look at the
technology in this project. Further, over the course of this project, we’ll
take a quick look at some automatic watch lore and how these seemingly
anachronistic devices have survived and prospered in the digital age. Even
if you do not collect such treasured timepieces, this project may just inspire
you to start your own collection.
     Why a Watch Winder?
                 Because, as a collector, you own more than a single automatic watch, you
                 might want to think about keeping the watches that aren’t currently on your
                 wrist wound. If you read up on mechanical watches and winders, you will
                 find many pros and cons (probably more pros) of using a watch winder.
                 One big pro is that multifunction watches can take a long time to set if
                 they run down. There are also arguments that if a mechanical watch sits
                 in one position and doesn’t run, the lubricant tends to migrate to a low
                 point. Regular motion from a watch winder or from being worn keeps the
                 lubricant distributed and in the bearings where it belongs. While many sub-
                 scribe to this viewpoint, there is no real evidence either way.
                       There is yet another compelling argument for a watch winder. As a col-
                 lector, it’s nice to be able to display more of your collection than just one-at-
                 a-time on your wrist. Many of the commercial winders available come inside
                 exotic wood cases to show off the watches. But inexpensive winders tend not
                 to be reliable, and the expensive ones are, well, expensive.
                       I took a chance and bought one of the more economical models and
                 put two of my mechanical watches—a real and a faux Rolex—in it and fig-
                 ured I was done. But after less than six months, the winder failed. I took
                 it apart, and it appeared to be very poorly designed and made. Even if I
                 replaced the failed motor, the rest of the mechanism would probably not
                 be reliable. While using the winder, the faux Rolex did not wind all the way
                 and did not keep good time.
                       At that point, the question was whether to dig deep in my pockets for
                 the $400 or $500 winder (there are even models that sell well in excess of
                 $1,500, $2,000, or more) that promises reliability or to try to do better.
                 So the gauntlet was, metaphorically, thrown down. The challenge was to
                 design and build a reliable watch winder that would provide both a show-
                 case for my watches and have the flexibility and control over timing that
                 I wanted in a robust mechanical format. Arduino was the obvious choice
                 for controlling the frequency of watch turns, and the mechanics went
                 around that.
                       As you build your Watch Winder, you will find a lot of room for per-
                 sonalization both in the mechanical construction and the sketch. While
                 a watch winder is a utilitarian device made to keep your watches wound,
                 this version provides an elegant display platform for your timepieces—and
                 it is itself a work of art, a kinetic sculpture. You can see the final result in
                 Figure 4-1.
                       Because I selected Arduino as the logical timing element, I had to plan
                 the other electronics and software around that. We will revisit the H-bridge
                 circuit from the PCB Etcher (see “Using an H-Bridge” on page 48) to drive
                 the motor in both directions, and we’ll use transistors for increased drive
                 for the high-output LEDs. We’ll also use a Hall effect sensor to measure the
                 rotation of the watches.




90   Chapter 4
Figure 4-1: The finished Watch Winder. Unfortunately the black and white image doesn’t
do it justice: the brightly colored LEDs illuminate the device using the acrylic as a light
guide to transport the various colored LEDs.

     The sketch developed for this project uses functions and arrays to flash
the LEDs in repeating patterns. The sketch also instructs the controller to
read the state of the Hall effect sensor, which is either zero or one. Knowing
this state allows the controller to decide when to wind the watches and to
keep count of the number of turns to ensure that the watches don’t get
over- or underwound.




                                                                         A Watch Winder   91
                              The M ys tique of the Au tomatic Watch

                 The automatic watch was invented in the early 1920s and was commercial-
                 ized several years later. Over the next several years, many improvements
                 were made until it reached the level of sophistication of today’s instruments.
                 Automatic watches operate by using a pendulum attached to a ratchet assembly:
                 the ratchet assembly winds the watch’s mainspring as the pendulum swings. A
                 built in slip-clutch mechanism prevents overwinding. See Figure 4-2 for a look
                 inside one of these watches.




                 Figure 4-2: An automatic watch with the back removed,
                 exposing the pendulum and the fulcrum (the screw in the
                 center), which combine with a ratchet assembly to wind
                 the watch’s mainspring

                      Automatic watches from just about all watch manufacturers enjoyed broad
                 success for several decades. However, in the early 1960s, Bulova developed
                 its Accutron tuning-fork electronic watch, and the digital quartz electronic
                                                           1
                 watch from Pulsar followed shortly after.
                      Despite the influx of electronic watches (and now smart watches), leading
                 makers of mechanical watches have survived—and even prospered—in this
                 age. Today, automatic watches are sold anywhere from under $100 to tens or
                 even hundreds of thousands of dollars.
                      Why would someone pay a premium for a watch that is not particularly
                 accurate, is heavy, is often bulky, and has to be kept wound when not in use?
                 I’m sure the answer is different for every collector, but I’d guess that they, like
                 me, enjoy the elegance, prestige, sophistication, sense of history, and fine
                 mechanical machinery that can’t be achieved with its electronic counterparts—
                 though the iWatch comes close in some respects. And like any collectible, one
                 automatic watch is never enough—which brings us to the Watch Winder.


                 1. The transition from mechanical to electronic watches has been described as a prime
                 example of Thomas Kuhn’s concept of a paradigm shift, which he describes in his 1962
                 book The Structure of Scientific Revolution.




92   Chapter 4
Required Tools
             Drill and drill bits
             Tapered reamer set
             Small vise-grip pliers
             Center punch
             Weld-On 4 and Weld-On 16 acrylic bonding fluid
             Assorted sandpaper, including grades from 220 to 600 and grade 1500
             for final polish
             Jewelers rouge or other liquid plastic polish
             (Optional) Circular saw
             (Optional) Thread-locking fluid
             (Optional) Wire-wrap tool
             (Optional) Rotary tool (For example, you could get a Dremel tool with
             an abrasive cutoff wheel.)


Parts List
         If you want to build a Watch Winder like the one pictured, you will need
         several pieces of acrylic and some other hardware, which I detail in this
         section.

         Acrylic
         The following acrylic parts can easily be cut from a standard sheet of
         acrylic. Without the disks, which I recommend you purchase separately,
         everything can be cut from two 12×12-inch acrylic sheets (one 3/8-inch
         thick, one 1/4-inch thick). If you prefer, you can find vendors that will laser-
         cut acrylic to your dimensions. (ZLazr, among many others, is equipped to
         do that.) It will cost a little more than doing it yourself but will make it both
         cutting and finishing easier.

             Four pieces with dimensions 1/4 × 2 × 1 1/2 inches (long sides of the
             watch basket; can be 3/8 inches)
             Four pieces with dimensions 1/4 × 1 × 2 inches (short sides of the watch
             basket; can be 3/8 inches)
             Two pieces with dimensions 3/8 × 3 × 2 inches (bearing holders of bear-
             ing box)
             Two pieces with dimensions 3/8 × 2 × 1 1/2 inches (mounting side of
             bearing box)
             One piece with dimensions 1/4 × 1 × 2 inches (motor mount)
             Two round pieces, 3/8 inches thick and 5 inches in diameter (watch
             basket ends)



                                                                         A Watch Winder   93
                     Two pieces with dimensions 1 1/2 × 5 × 1/4 inches (side supports for
                     stand)
                     One piece with dimensions 3/8 × 3 × 5 1/2 inches (base for stand)
                     One piece with dimensions 3 × 1 1/2 × 3/8 inches (lightbar)
                     One piece with dimensions 2 1/2 × 2 1/2 × 3/8 inches (shield
                     mounting)
                     Two 3.5 mm standoffs with M/F M3-05 threads (motor mounts)
                     Three 1.5 mm standoffs with M/F M3-05 threads (shield mount)

                     There are several online vendors you could purchase the acrylic for this
                 project from; just search for acrylic sheet on Google to find one near you. In
                 the United States, http://www.zlazr.com/ seems to be good. At the time of this
                 writing, I talked with the owner personally, and he said he can handle the
                 kind of cutting required for this project with no problem.

                 Other Hardware and Circuit Components
                     One Arduino Nano or clone
                     One Hall effect switch, such as Melexis US5881LUA (Dimensions for
                     side supports should be 1 1/2 × 5 × 1/4. See “Building the Stand” on
                     page 115.)
                     One driveshaft, 8 inches long and 1/4 inches in diameter with 28 threads
                     per inch (I suggest brass because it’s easy to work.)
                     Two ball bearings (R4A-2RS)
                     Six jam nuts, 1/4-inch-28
                     Two decorative bolts, 1/4-inch-28, 1 inch long (I used chromed Allen
                     bolts.)
                     Ten ZTX649 transistors
                     One SN754410 quad H-bridge
                     Ten 470-ohm resistors
                     One 10-kilohm, 1/8 W resistor
                     One 0.1 µF ceramic capacitor (C1)
                     One 10 µF tantalum capacitor (C2)
                     One custom shield as described in “The Shield” on page 108, or
                     perf board (You can also have the shield custom fabricated from
                     ExpressPCB; see “Making Your Own PCBs” on page 13.)
                     One gear head motor (I used a 6V, 20 RPM motor called the Amico 20
                     RPM 6VDC 0.45 A.)
                     One LM7805 voltage regulator
                     Fourteen LEDs, in assorted colors (I purchased both clear and frosted
                     versions. The higher-output units tended to be clear.)
                     Assorted hookup wire and wire-wrap wire



94   Chapter 4
            Ten stakes for LED wire wrap or soldering (Try Pololu item #966 or
            Electronic Goldmine item #G19870.)
            One length brass round that’s 3/8 or 1/2 inches in diameter and
            approximately 3/4 inches long (I used one with a 3/8-inch diameter.
            Brass stock is readily available in 6- and 12-inch lengths, which can be
            cut to size with a hacksaw.)
            One 6-inch length of piano wire that’s 0.39 inches in diameter
            One niobium, or neodymium, magnet, approximately 3/8 inches round
            and 1/8 inches thick
            One flat-head 4-40 screw
            Six M3×3/8-inch screws
            Seven M3-05×1/2-inch screws
            (Optional) One Amico H7EC-BCM counter
            (Optional) Eight 270-ohm resistors (Use these when you build the
            breadboard prototype if you choose to follow my exact instructions in
            “The Breadboard” on page 98.)


Downloads
       Before you start building, go to https://www.nostarch.com/arduinoplayground/,
       download the resource files for this book, and look for the following files
       for Chapter 4:
            Templates MotorMountAndBearingBox.pdf, BaseAndLightbar.pdf,
            WatchBasket.pdf
            Mechanical drawing MotorAssembly.pdf
            Shield WatchWinder.pcb
            Sketch WatchWinder.ino



Basic Watch Winder Requirements
       Some initial research suggested that a watch winder should rotate a watch
       between 600 and 1,200 revolutions per day to keep it in top shape. But that
       is not completely correct. I subsequently discovered that the range was actu-
       ally much wider, and according to at least two websites of leading automatic
       watches, watches cannot be overwound because they have a built-in protec-
       tion system. I also learned that watches should be rotated both clockwise
       and counterclockwise to keep lubricant in the right places and to avoid
       possible uneven wear over a very long period of time. There is a wealth of
       information about this subject on the web, both on sites for individual watch
       manufacturers as well as on sites for watch winders.




                                                                    A Watch Winder   95
                      Apparently the total number of turns is the important part, not neces-
                 sarily the sequencing of the turns or getting exactly the same number of
                 turns in each direction. (There is a possible downside to winding, if a watch
                 is wound too much over an extended period.) That doesn’t sound so daunt-
                 ing, right? I thought so, too.


     Using an Arduino to Control Winder Revolutions
                 A purely utilitarian watch winder just has to serve its function, rotating the
                 watches so the pendulums swing. But it’s more interesting to have a winder
                 with extra features. As mentioned in “Why a Watch Winder?” on page 90,
                 some winders are dressed up with fancy exotic wood boxes to display the
                 watches.
                     However, this is an Arduino project, and extra technical features and
                 LEDs should reflect the flexibility and versatility of the platform. In a devel-
                 opmental model, the original sketch instructed the electronics to turn a
                 motor first in one direction and then the other, using delays to ensure that
                 the requisite 600 to 1,200 revolutions occurred each day.
                     But it turns out that some watches need more than the minimum
                 number of revolutions, and some can get away with less. The easiest way to
                 change the number of revolutions is by adjusting the various delays in the
                 sketch as needed. You could even add hardware to the circuit to allow you
                 to adjust the number of turns per day with a potentiometer, as I describe in
                 “Design Notes” on page 124.
                     To drive the motor itself, I used an H-bridge IC. It accepts control logic
                 from the Arduino and lets you reverse the polarity to the motor from a
                 single power supply to allow the motor to rotate in both directions.

        Note     For more information on H-bridges, see “Using an H-Bridge” on page 48.



     Using a Hall Effect Sensor to Monitor Rotations
                 Then, there was the matter of how to meter the number of turns the device
                 made to assist the timing and give some more information to the sketch.
                 The number of turns per unit time is a function of the motor, and while the
                 timing I provided for the motor specified could conceivably work, it might
                 not be consistent for all motors.
                     For example, I sampled three motors of the same model at the same
                 voltage, and each ran at a slightly different speed. Further, if you elect to
                 substitute another motor with a different rotational speed, the rotation
                 count would be different. And, in beta testing, one user experienced dif-
                 ficulty running a 6V motor on 5V. (See “Motor Voltage” on page 126.)
                 Because the number of turns per unit time is a function of the motor,
                 these inconsistencies could present a problem if timing alone determined
                 the total number of rotations; some mechanism to monitor the number of
                 revolutions is needed.


96   Chapter 4
             To assure consistent timing, I decided to meter the number of turns
        the device made. Thus, I attached a small magnet to the rotating shaft that
        turns the watches and mounted a Hall effect device, or a sensor that detects
        a magnetic field, in line with the magnet. A small reed switch could be sub-
        stituted for the Hall effect sensor if you wanted.
             When the watch and the magnet rotate, the Hall effect switch turns on
        only when in close proximity to the magnet, causing the switch to turn on
        and off once per rotation. Each time the Hall effect switch changes state,
        the Arduino increments an internal counter. Combined with the sketch,
        this ensures the proper number of turns per day is made in all cases, regard-
        less of the speed of the motor. Unlike the reed switch, the Hall effect switch
        does not require any buffering or debounce, as discussed in “The Sketch”
        on page 102, because a Schmitt Trigger is included in the device’s circuit.
        If you elect to use a reed switch, you may have to add the debounce into the
        sketch.
             When using a Hall effect switch with a permanent magnet, you just
        have to be careful how you move the magnet around. Some mechanical
        watches are damaged by close proximity to a strong magnetic field because
        the hairspring becomes magnetized, resulting in a change in physical char-
        acteristics that cause timing to be off. While the magnet specified is small
        and unlikely to cause a problem, I strongly recommend you keep any mag-
        net at least an inch away from any watch—mechanical or electronic.


The Schematic
        Figure 4-3 shows the schematic diagram of the circuit used for the Watch
        Winder. Notice that the output from the Hall effect device has a pull-up
        resistor tied to the positive supply. This holds the input to Arduino pin A0
        high until the Hall effect switch, or reed switch, encounters a strong enough
        magnetic field, which closes the switch and brings the pin low. The Hall
        effect device uses what is essentially an open collector on its output, so with-
        out the pull-up resistor, the collector would be left floating and could give a
        false trigger.
             The two capacitors prevent the LM7805 regulator from oscillating on
        its own and drawing excessive power. Although I looked at both the input
        and the output of the regulator with an oscilloscope and saw no oscillation,
        I decided to add the capacitors as a preventative measure. I selected them
        based on previous projects, and they work well.
             I was trying to develop a spectacular look for the Watch Winder, as befits
        some of the timepieces it holds, so I used higher-power LEDs, as described in
        the “Parts List” on page 93. These LEDs have a light output of as much as
        100,000 to 200,000 or more millicandela (MCD). But that raised yet another
        problem. The Arduino Nano’s processor chip, an ATmega328, can source
        or sink only 40 mA per output pin. Further, the entire chip is rated at only
        200 to 300 mA for its entire current drain. Because the 100,000+ MCD LEDs
        draw around 30 to 60 mA each, something had to be done.



                                                                       A Watch Winder   97
Figure 4-3: The Watch Winder circuit. The transistors connect to the digital outputs of the Nano, while A0 is
tied high through the 10-kilohm resistor.

                       One 1 A transistor per LED is included in the schematic to pick up the
                   load. The collectors of the NPN transistors—the positive side—go to VIN
                   rather than the 5V that powers the Nano and H-bridge, so the LEDs take
                   no toll on the voltage regulator, even though the emitters follow the base
                   and send 5V to the LEDs.


     The Breadboard
                   Just like other projects we’ve discussed, the Watch Winder started out as a
                   breadboard, shown in Figure 4-4. This allowed me to sound out the tech-
                   nology and do the preliminary tuning of the sketch.



98   Chapter 4
                    H-bridge
Arduino
Nano                                                                     Hall effect
                                                                         sensor




                                                                            Magnet


Figure 4-4: The Watch Winder breadboard was used as a proof-of-concept for the proj-
ect. Here, I powered it with the Regulated Power Supply from Chapter 3.

    I suggest building a breadboard for this project first so you can see
where everything goes and why. With a breadboard, you also get to play with
the sketch and LEDs without having to unsolder and resolder with each
change. I used a 6.5-inch long breadboard to hold everything. I did take a
couple of shortcuts on the breadboard, which are noted in the instructions;
you can also just build straight from the schematic, instead.
    To wire up the breadboard, take the following steps:

1.   Connect the red stripe on the right side of the breadboard to the corre-
     sponding red stripe on the left. These are your positive rails.
2.   Connect the blue stripe on the right side of the breadboard to the
     corresponding blue stripe on the left. These are your negative rails
     (ground connections).
3.   Insert the Arduino Nano at one end.
4.   Connect the 5V pin of the Nano to the red positive rail.
5.   Connect the GND pin of the Nano to the blue negative rail.
6.   Insert the LM7805 regulator, and connect the output pin to the red posi-
     tive rail. (Figure 4-5 shows the regulator pinout.)

                                               Output
                                               Ground
                                               Input

     Figure 4-5: LM7805 regulator pinout in a TO-220 package


                                                                    A Watch Winder   99
                  7.  Connect the ground terminal of the regulator to the blue negative rail.
                  8.  The input terminal of the regulator will connect to a blank row in the
                      breadboard, which will connect to the +7.5V to 9V supply.
                  9. Connect capacitor C1 from the input of the regulator to ground.
                  10. Connect capacitor C2 from the output of the regulator to ground.
                  11. Insert the SN754410 H-bridge several rows away from the Nano, strad-
                      dling the gutter in the middle of the breadboard. (Figure 4-6 shows the
                      H-bridge pinout.)

                              1,2EN      1       16 VCC1
                                    1A   2       15   4A

                                    1Y   3       14   4Y

                        Heat sink        4       13         Heat sink
                       and ground        5       12        and ground

                                    2Y   6       11   3Y

                                    2A   7       10   3A

                                VCC2     8        9 3,4EN

                       Figure 4-6: SN754410 H-bridge pinout in a
                       DIP form factor

                  12. Connect pins 4, 5, 12, and 13 of the H-bridge to ground.
                  13. Connect pins 8, 9, and 16 of the H-bridge to the red positive rail.
                  14. Attach pins 14 and 11 of the H-bridge to the motor with leads at least
                      10 to 12 inches long. The connections to the motor will have to be
                      soldered unless you use alligator clips or clip leads.
                  15. Attach approximately 8-inch wires to all three leads of the Hall effect
                      sensor. Connect the leads attached to the positive and negative leads
                      of the Hall effect sensor to the red positive rail and blue negative rail,
                      respectively.
                  16. Connect the wire attached to the third pin of the Hall effect sensor to
                      pin A0 on the Nano. The Hall effect sensor will be taped (I used mask-
                      ing tape) to the motor body (this works because the leads are insulated)
                      in such a position that the active part of the device will be close to the
                      magnet attached to the shaft as it goes around.
                  17. Connect a 10-kilohm resistor from pin A0 on the Nano to the red posi-
                      tive rail.
                  18. Connect pin 10 of the H-bridge to pin D13 on the Nano.
                  19. Connect pin 15 of the H-bridge to pin D12 on the Nano.




100   Chapter 4
       20. Insert five ZTX649 transistors, each using three
           rows, on one side of the breadboard. (Figure 4-7
           shows the transistor pinout.)
       21. Connect the collector of each transistor to the
           red positive rail.

NOTE   These transistor connections differ from the final schematic,
       where the collectors will be tied to the 9V input voltage.

       22. Take five LEDs, and connect the positive termi-
           nal of an LED to the emitter of each transistor.
       23. Connect the negative terminal of each LED to                  Collector Base
                                                                                          Emitter
           ground through a 270-ohm resistor.
       24. Connect three additional transistors, LEDs,                   Figure 4-7: ZTX649
           and 270-ohm resistors on the opposite side of                 transistor pinout in a
                                                                         TO-92 package
           the breadboard in a similar manner to the five
           groups connected in steps 20–23.

NOTE   Steps 20–25 are different than the schematic, as the LEDs are driven directly from the
       Nano, for ease of experimentation. In the schematic, they are connected using a tran-
       sistor. Using the 470-ohm resistor instead of the 270-ohm resistor limits the current to
       the Nano.

       25. Connect the positive terminal of another LED to pin D12 of the Nano.
       26. Connect the negative terminal of the pin D12 LED to an empty row on
           the breadboard.
       27. Connect one end of a 470-ohm resistor to the negative terminal of the
           pin D12 LED, and connect the other end of the resistor to ground.
       28. Connect the positive terminal of another new LED to pin 13 of the Nano.
       29. Connect the negative terminal of the pin 13 LED to an empty row on
           the breadboard.
       30. Connect one end of a 470-ohm resistor to the negative terminal of the
           pin 13 LED, and connect the other end of the resistor to ground.
       31. Connect pins D4, D5, D6, D7, D8, D9, D10, and D11 on the Nano to the
           bases of the transistors feeding the LEDs.

           Because the breadboard is for illustration only, the order that the con-
       nections are made in doesn’t matter unless you want to reprogram the
       Arduino while the circuit is on the breadboard.
           The magnet was mounted to a plug on the motor shaft using double-
       sided adhesive foam tape. For the plug, you can use almost anything—a
       cork, a rubber stopper, and so on—as long as it puts the magnet in a posi-
       tion so it will be about 3/8 inches from the sensor as the magnet rotates.




                                                                            A Watch Winder   101
                       After you complete the breadboard, upload the WatchWinder.ino sketch
                  to the Arduino. Just follow the instructions in “Uploading Sketches to Your
                  Arduino” on page 5.


     The Sketch
                  The Watch Winder employs functions and arrays to show different flashing
                  sequences on the LEDs without rewriting the sequence each time. There
                  are also some excruciatingly long delays: about 829 rotations in 24 hours
                  translates to a motor at 20 RPM being on for approximately 32.5 minutes
                  out of 1,400 minutes in the day. This means that if the sketch were to han-
                  dle an entire day of turning, it would be idle for 1,367.5 minutes a day.
                      But you can divvy up the rotations so that the sketch can be repeated
                  and need only some fraction of the 24 hours to complete. For example, if
                  an hour is selected as the length of time it takes for the sketch loop to com-
                  plete, the motor has to do some 24 turns. It could do 12 each way or some
                  other combination.
                      In the following sketch, I also made an effort to make the lights and
                  motor movements as visually interesting as possible, leaving very little time
                  when nothing is happening—but that’s an artistic choice.

                  /*This gives about 829 revs/day*/

                  const int HallPin = A0; //Identify those things that will not change
                  const int CWpin = 12;
                  const int CCWpin = 13;

                  const int LED11 = 11;
                  const int LED10 = 10;
                  const int LED9 = 9;
                  const int LED8 = 8;
                  const int LED7 = 7;
                  const int LED6 = 6;
                  const int LED5 = 5;
                  const int LED4 = 4;

                  int autoDelay = 1000;
                  int timer = 500;
                  int timer2 = 3000;
                  int repeats = 10;

                  int previous;
                  int HallValue = 1; //Response from the Hall effect sensor
                  int time = 0;
                  int state;
                  int count = 0;
                  int q = 0;
                  int i;
                  int j;




102   Chapter 4
int ledPins[] = {
   11, 4, 7, 6, 8, 10, 5, 9,
};
int pinCount = 8;

void blinkIt() {
  //Initiate rapid blink sequence
  for(int thisPin = 0; thisPin < pinCount; thisPin++) {
    //Turn the pin on:
    digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], HIGH);
    delay(timer2);
    //Turn the pin off:
    digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], LOW);
    delay(timer2);
  }

    //Loop from the highest pin to the lowest:
    for(int thisPin = pinCount - 1; thisPin >= 0; thisPin--) {
      //Turn the pin on:
      digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], HIGH);
      delay(timer2);
      //Turn the pin off:
      digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], LOW);
      delay(timer2);
    }
}

void flashIt() {
  //Initiate rapid blink sequence
  for(int thisPin = 0; thisPin < pinCount; thisPin++) {
    //Turn the pin on:
    digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], HIGH);
    delay(timer2);
    //Turn the pin off:
    digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], LOW);
  }

    //Loop from the highest pin to the lowest:
    for(int thisPin = pinCount - 1; thisPin >= 0; thisPin--) {
      //Turn the pin on:
      digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], HIGH);
      delay(timer2);
      //Turn the pin off:
      digitalWrite(ledPins[thisPin], LOW);
    }
}

void allatOncefast() {
  {
    digitalWrite(LED4, HIGH);
    digitalWrite(LED5, HIGH);
    digitalWrite(LED6, HIGH);
    digitalWrite(LED7, HIGH);
    digitalWrite(LED8, HIGH);
    digitalWrite(LED9, HIGH);

                                                                 A Watch Winder   103
                          digitalWrite(LED10, HIGH);
                          digitalWrite(LED11, HIGH);

                          delay(500);

                          digitalWrite(LED4, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED5, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED6, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED7, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED8, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED9, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED10, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED11, LOW);

                          delay(500);
                      }
                  }

                  void allatOnce() {
                    {
                      digitalWrite(LED4, HIGH);
                      digitalWrite(LED5, HIGH);
                      digitalWrite(LED6, HIGH);
                      digitalWrite(LED7, HIGH);
                      digitalWrite(LED8, HIGH);
                      digitalWrite(LED9, HIGH);
                      digitalWrite(LED10, HIGH);
                      digitalWrite(LED11, HIGH);

                          delay(4000);

                          digitalWrite(LED4, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED5, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED6, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED7, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED8, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED9, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED10, LOW);
                          digitalWrite(LED11, LOW);

                          delay(2000);
                      }
                  }

                  void setup() {
                    pinMode(HallPin, INPUT);      //Identifies inputs and outputs
                    pinMode(CWpin, OUTPUT);
                    pinMode(CCWpin, OUTPUT);

                      Serial.begin(9600);

                      for(int thisPin = 0; thisPin < pinCount; thisPin++)    {
                        pinMode(ledPins [thisPin], OUTPUT);
                      }
                  }

104   Chapter 4
    void loop() {
      int HallValue = (digitalRead(HallPin)); //Sets value of initial Hall effect

      if(HallValue == HIGH && previous == LOW) {
        if(state == HIGH)
          state = LOW;
        else
          state = HIGH;

          //Increments counter each time the Hall effect sensor passes the magnet
u         count++;
      }

      /* The "Serial.print" line was used in development. I left it in so that
         you can experiment and look at some of the values on a serial
         monitor. You might even want to change the parameters of what you
         are looking at in the monitor.
      */
      Serial.print("HallValue      ");
      Serial.println(HallValue);
      Serial.print("count                ");
      Serial.println(count);
      Serial.print("CCW                      ");
      Serial.println(" ");

      if(count == 1) {
        digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
        digitalWrite(CWpin, LOW);
      }

      if(count == 3) {
        digitalWrite(CWpin, HIGH);
        digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
      }

      if(count == 3) {
        for(i = 0; i < repeats; i++) {
          allatOncefast();
        }
        count = count + 1;
      }

      if(count == 3) {
        digitalWrite(CWpin, LOW);
        digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
      }

      if(count == 4) {
        digitalWrite(CWpin, HIGH);
        digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
      }




                                                                   A Watch Winder   105
                  if(count == 4) {
                    for(q = 0; q < repeats; q++) {
                      blinkIt();
                    }
                    count = count + 1;
                  }

                  if(count == 5) {
                    for(j = 0; j < repeats; j++) {
                      allatOnce();
                    }
                    delay(50);
                    count = count + 1;
                  }

                  if(count == 6) {
                    digitalWrite(CCWpin, LOW);
                    digitalWrite(CWpin, HIGH);
                  }

                  if(count == 7) {
                    digitalWrite(CWpin, LOW);
                    digitalWrite(CCWpin, LOW);
                  }

                  if(count == 7) {
                    for(i = 0; i < repeats; i++) {
                      flashIt();
                    }
                    count = count + 1;
                  }

                  if(count == 8) {
                    digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
                    digitalWrite(CWpin, LOW);
                  }

                  if(count == 10) {
                    for(i = 0; i < repeats; i++) {
                      allatOncefast();
                    }
                    count = count + 1;
                  }

                  if(count == 11) {
                    digitalWrite(CCWpin, LOW);
                    digitalWrite(CWpin, LOW);
                  }

                  if(count == 11) {
                    for(i = 0; i < repeats; i++) {
                      blinkIt();
                    }




106   Chapter 4
    delay(2000);
    count = count + 1;
}

if(count == 12) {
  digitalWrite(CCWpin, LOW);
  digitalWrite(CWpin, HIGH);
}

if(count == 13) {
  digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
  digitalWrite(CWpin, HIGH);
}

if(count == 13) {
  for(i = 0; i < repeats; i++) {
    flashIt();
  }
  count = count + 1;
}

if(count == 14) {
  for(i = 0; i < repeats; i++) {
    allatOnce();
  }
}

if(count == 14) {
  digitalWrite(CWpin, LOW);
  digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
  delay(autoDelay);
}

if(count == 17) {
  digitalWrite(CWpin, HIGH);
  digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
}

if(count == 17) {
  for(i = 0; i < 20; i++) {
    blinkIt();
  }
}

{
    for(i = 0; i < repeats; i++) {
      allatOncefast();
    }
    count = count + 1;
}




                                     A Watch Winder   107
                          if(count == 18) {
                            digitalWrite(CCWpin, HIGH);
                            digitalWrite(CWpin, LOW);
                            delay(2000);
                            digitalWrite(CCWpin, LOW);
                            digitalWrite(CWpin, HIGH);
                            delay(2000);
                          }

                          if(count > 20) {
                  v         count = 0;
                          }
                          previous = HallValue;
                      }

                           First, the sketch creates several constants, integers, and arrays, which
                      assist with timing turns by reading from the Hall effect sensor and counting
                      the turns. Next, come a few function definitions: blinkIt() and flashIt() blink
                      the LEDs in different patterns, while allatOnceFast() and allatOnce() blink the
                      LEDs all at the same time with different delays.
                           As usual, the setup() function tells the Arduino which pins are inputs
                      and outputs. At the start of the loop() function, the Hall effect sensor is
                      read, and the sketch increments the counter at u as needed, printing a few
                      useful debugging values to the serial monitor along the way. This sketch
                      uses the count value to turn different sequences on or off and limit the rep-
                      etitions. However, because count is reset at the end of the sequence at v, it
                      cannot be used as a totalizer.
                           Finally, for various counts, the sketch uses if statements to hard-code
                      different patterns for turning the watches and flashing the LEDs; I show a
                      few here, but I encourage you to set up your own. The sketch is written with
                      many functions you can use as-is or repeat in a for loop to give multiple
                      iterations.


     The Shield
                      As in some of the other Arduino projects, the shield is not terribly complex,
                      but it looks a little busy. For simplicity, this shield is a single-sided board.
                      The circuit uses an LM7805 voltage regulator to handle excess current that
                      could result from using a different motor. The on-board regulator built into
                      the Nano is intended only for currents less than 300 mA.

        NOTE          I have used the regulator in this project at up to 500 mA, but the regulator tends to
                      get pretty warm, and I don’t feel comfortable using it at that level.

                           You may be able to leave the regulator out; the collectors of the transis-
                      tors feeding the high-output LEDs are configured as emitter-followers and
                      wired directly to the positive 9V supply, so they are not contributing to the
                      load on the regulated 5V.



108   Chapter 4
                         Figure 4-8 shows the foil pattern for the shield (left), and the silk-
                     screen layer (right).




Figure 4-8: The foil pattern of the shield (left) and the silk-screen layer (right). The Watch Winder shield’s silk-
screen layer shows the approximate placement of the Nano, H-bridge, contacts for the external counter, Hall
effect sensor, potentiometer, LED connections, jumpers, input voltage (VIN), and ground (GND). The PCB
Express file is available to download from https://www.nostarch.com/arduinoplayground/.

                          Notice the contacts for the Hall effect switch at the top of the board,
                     labeled Hall. I soldered wires that connected the Hall effect device directly
                     to the PCB, though you could use a connector if you prefer.
                          In the center of the board, I left connections for a potentiometer (POT)
                     for external adjustment of the period, an option I describe in “Total Rotation
                     Adjustment” on page 124. The numbers of the digital outputs are labeled at
                     the left-hand side.
                          If you choose to assemble the Watch Winder shield, note that the Nano
                     is meant to be plugged into female headers soldered onto the shield and
                     that the transistors are underneath the Nano board. Push the transistors
                     down far enough before you solder them so they will not be in the way of
                     the Nano when it’s plugged in. I had to place the transistors fairly close
                     to fit all the connections into the PCB layout. The ZTX649 transistors I
                     selected fit well enough within the 0.100-inch spacing allowed by the foot-
                     print of the Nano.
                          You will also have to add a few jumper wires to complete the con-
                     nections on the shield. They are marked on the silk-screen pattern. In
                     Figure 4-8, those appear as five black lines. Don’t forget to include them
                     when wiring up the board. I also left out the capacitors from the LM7805
                     regulator’s input and output to ground; in the finished board, they are
                     soldered on externally. If you want those capacitors, simply solder a 10.0 µF
                     tantalum and a 0.1 µF ceramic capacitor directly to the pins of the regula-
                     tor, as shown in the schematic in Figure 4-3.


                                                                                                  A Watch Winder   109
     Overview of the Motor Assembly
                  When you’ve had enough fun watching the LEDs blink on the breadboard,
                  watching the motor start and stop, and playing with the sketch, it’s time
                  to address the mechanical side of this project, which offers a few special
                  challenges. This winder won’t be functional until the motor has something
                  to turn; see Figure 4-9 for a detailed diagram of the motor, motor mount,
                  transmission, bearing box, and driveshaft, which comprise the turning
                  assembly.
                                                                Vinyl tubing

                                                     Bushing          Piano wire
                                 Set screw                                      Ball bearing
                        Motor shaft
                                                                                   Jam nut


                         Motor



                                      Piano wire

                  Figure 4-9: The construction entails making a small box that retains the bearings through
                  which the driveshaft is mounted and held in place by jam nuts. The motor, mounted on
                  standoffs, is connected to the driveshaft, and the watch basket will be attached to the
                  other end of the driveshaft.

                      The driveshaft will need to be mounted through the bearings, and the
                  two can be held together with jam nuts. I chose a fairly standard R4A-2RS
                  bearing, which is a relatively common part and has a 3/4-inch outer diameter,
                  a 1/4-inch inner diameter, and a 9/16-inch thickness. I suggest ball bear-
                  ings because the prebuilt winder I bought used the brass bushing of the
                  motor as the only bearing, and that’s what failed. Because the inside diam-
                  eter of the bearing was 1/4 inches, I decided to use a standard threaded
                  rod at a 1/4-inch × 20 tpi (turns per inch) or 1/4-inch × 28 tpi rather than
                  attempt to press-fit a 1/4-inch bar into the bearing.

        NOTE      I used jam nuts to fasten the rod to the bearings because they were thinner and less
                  obtrusive looking than regular nuts, but you could also use standard nuts.



     Construction
                  Construction of the winder provided a number of challenges, particularly
                  working with the acrylic material—which was unfamiliar to me before this
                  project. Though there were some rough spots to get over, I learned by trial
                  and error some ways to get the job done. Figure 4-10 shows the completed
                  Watch Winder on its side.




110   Chapter 4
Figure 4-10: The completed Watch Winder on its side, showing the base fabrication,
bearing box, motor mount, and watch basket

     The toughest part was cutting the acrylic and drilling the holes for the
ball bearings. There are several ways to cut acrylic, and none of them is
particularly easy. If you use a supplier that will laser-cut the acrylic parts for
you, this will be a lot easier. Several companies offer that service for a little
more than the price of the raw materials. I mentioned one of them, ZLazr,
earlier.
     If you have access to a circular saw, that’s about one of the easiest DIY
approaches. Otherwise, just about any saw will do. I’ve used a hacksaw,
which works better than most if you take your time. (If you go too fast, the
acrylic will heat up and start to melt, causing the saw to bind.) I even know
some people who have had success scoring and snapping the acrylic sheet.
Just use whichever approach works best for you.
     See “Acrylic” on page 93 for a list of acrylic shapes needed for the bear-
ing box, the watch basket, and the stand. Cut these pieces now, if you’ve not
done so already, and take the following steps to build the pieces.

Preparing the Motor Mount and Bearing Box Acrylic
First, print the motor mount template from this chapter’s folder (see
Figure 4-11), cut it out, and align it on the acrylic for the motor mount
using the centerline.




                                                                    A Watch Winder   111
                                                        F
                                                 D              E
                  Motor mount

                                                         0.33 in

                                                        C
                                         A                                B
                  Bearing box

                                                             0.69 in


                  Figure 4-11: Templates for motor mount and bearing
                  box. You can download the templates at https://
                  www​.nostarch.com/arduinoplayground/.

                       Tape the template to the acrylic, lining up the centerline on the center
                  of the acrylic piece, and mark the drill centers for holes A, B, D, E, and F.
                  To mark the holes, just punch the centers with a center punch or nail. Now,
                  drill them; use a 1/8-inch bit for A, B, D, and E and a 3/8-inch bit for F.
                       Then, set this piece aside, and gather the acrylic for the bearing box.
                  The final bearing box will look like Figure 4-12 once we put it all together.




                  Figure 4-12: Completed bearing box, before final trim
                  and polish. One bearing is temporarily in place.

                      Use the bearing box template to mark the drill centers for holes A, B,
                  and C on one of the bearing mount pieces. C will be the bearing hole, and
                  A and B will be for the motor mount’s standoffs. Center punch and drill
                  one of the bearing plate’s two smaller holes with a 2.5 mm (or #39) drill
                  and tap the hole with a M3-05 tap. These holes will accept the standoffs for
                  mounting the motor. Use the same template to mark only the bearing hole



112   Chapter 4
          (C) on the acrylic for the opposite side of the bearing box. Then, take the
          two pieces of bearing box acrylic that won’t hold bearings, and mark the
          center by drawing lines from corner to corner. Center punch them, and drill
          1/4-inch holes for mounting to the stand.

WARNING   When drilling any size hole in the acrylic, securely clamp the piece, as shown in
          Figure 4-13. Do not hold it manually. If the drill or hole saw binds, the acrylic will
          want to spin. In any case, keep the drill at a slow speed and advance it very gradu-
          ally into the work.




          Figure 4-13: Drilling a large hole in the acrylic. Note that the acrylic piece is
          securely clamped down.

               The best solution I found to make the holes for the bearing and other
          large holes in the acrylic is to drill a relatively small hole—perhaps 1/4
          or 3/8 inches—and ream them out with a tapered reamer to the finished
          dimension (see Figure 4-14). This is, by far, the safest and easiest approach
          and the one I strongly recommend.
               When you ream out the bearing hole, make sure to ream from both
          sides. This will result in the center of the hole being a slightly smaller diam-
          eter than the outsides. Ream until the bearing is a tight fit and then, if nec-
          essary, you can use an anaerobic bonding agent to fill in around the edges.
               The final prep stage for the acrylic is to sand and finish it. How you
          cut the acrylic originally will determine how much finishing it will take to
          get the edges ready. If you had the pieces laser cut, little finishing will be
          required. For all finishing, I used ascending grades of sandpaper, starting
          with 220 grit and going up to 1500—that is, 220, 320, 400, 600, and then
          1500. Automatic sanders—orbital, belt, vibratory, and so forth—often are
          too rough, and without special care, they will melt the acrylic. If you use one,
          try it on a scrap piece first. The sanding process worked well even though



                                                                                    A Watch Winder   113
                  some extra sanding was required on roughly cut sections. Additional sand-
                  ing was required on the opposing piece to make everything fit together as a
                  rectangle—or as a cube in the case of the bearing box.




                  Figure 4-14: Using a tapered reamer to enlarge the bearing hole
                  to the finished dimension

                       Use a liquid polish or jewelers rouge to achieve the final polish. Make
                  sure to remove all the wax from the polish from the surface before bond-
                  ing. Try not to round the edges of the sections so the thinner bonding
                  agent (Weld-On 4) will work well. You want to assure that you have suffi-
                  cient bonding surface in contact to make a secure bond.

                  Bonding the Acrylic for the Bearing Box
                  Now, it’s time to use a bonding agent to connect the pieces of your bearing
                  box. Fortunately, bonding the acrylic actually turned out to be somewhat
                  easier than I anticipated.
                       Where the edges are smooth but not too badly rounded, Weld-On 4
                  thin bonding fluid should work quite satisfactorily. It partially dissolves
                  the acrylic and forms an actual weld. The most difficult part is keeping the
                  fluid from running where it shouldn’t go. If you have larger gaps, or have
                  rounded the edges, try Weld-On 16, which has a higher viscosity and a clear
                  acrylic filler, to fill gaps and voids where necessary.
                       In both cases, you should follow the instructions on the product, but
                  here’s how the acrylic weld works in general: just clamp the dry pieces of
                  acrylic together, and then, using a needle applicator included with the




114   Chapter 4
       bonding agent, apply a thin layer of acrylic cement to each joint. Capillary
       action will draw the cement into the joint. For joints where the surfaces are
       a little more uneven, you can apply the thicker Weld-On 16 to one surface
       and then attach it to the other surface. Clamping is required for only a few
       minutes, but allow several hours for final curing.
            The system doesn’t need a lot of strength, but it should not fall apart
       when touched. For the parsimonious, a paint stripper like Klean Strip also
       works well to bond the acrylic. (The chemical behind the bonding agent in
       Weld-On is methyl chloride, which is the key ingredient in the paint strip-
       per.) Klean Strip is less than one-fourth the price of Weld-On.

NOTE   There are several tutorials on bonding acrylic on the web, too. If in doubt, look one
       up, and experiment with a few scrap pieces of acrylic first before trying it out on the
       pieces you worked so hard on.

           After bonding the bearing box, as shown in Figure 4-9, and bonding
       the side pieces to the bottom, check the alignment. Run the threaded
       rod through the bearings, and put the jam nuts in place without over-
       tightening them. Make sure the bearings don’t bind. If they are not well
       centered, this can happen, but usually, they will align themselves as you
       tighten the jam nuts a little. If your alignment is off, you may need to
       adjust the holes a little with the reamer and touch up with some acrylic
       cement, but I never ran into that problem. For now, remove the driveshaft
       from the bearing box.

       Building the Stand
       The stand is the least complex part of the project. It comprises the two
       side supports, 1 1/2 × 5 × 1/4 inches, and the base, 3/8 × 3 × 5 1/2 inches.
       I included the lightbar, 3 × 1 1/4 × 3/8 inches, and the shield mounting,
       2 1/2 × 2 1/2 × 3/8 inches, with the stand (see Figure 4-15).
            First, drill 1/4-inch holes in each side support a 1/2 inch from the
       top, centered left to right. Then, bond the two side supports to the base
       1 1/2 inches in from the edge of the base that will be the back. Next, drill
       the holes for the LEDs in the lightbar. I used five LEDs (red, blue, white,
       yellow, and green) that were 10 mm in size. You can use whatever color
       combination you choose.
            Finally, drill and mount the shield. To find the center of the piece, mark
       from corner to corner. Then, in the center, drill a #43 hole and tap for a 4-40
       screw. Drill a corresponding hole, centered and 2 inches from the rear edge,
       in the base. Next, use the shield itself, or the drawing from the ExpressPCB
       print, as a template to drill a hole for the three mounting screws. In design-
       ing the board, I failed to leave room for a fourth screw. However, three are
       more than sufficient, as there is no mechanical force on the board. I used a




                                                                             A Watch Winder   115
                       2.5 mm (#39) drill and tap for a M3-05 screw that the standoffs will fit into.
                       Figure 4-15 shows the dimensions of the parts and the partially assembled
                       base, including supports, the lightbar, and the shield mount.
                                     1.5 in


                                  Side supports



              2.5 in



      Use shield as template
      to drill mounting holes
                                                       5 in   0.375 in
                                  2.5 in
            Drill #43                                                                     1.5 in
            Tap 4-40


                                                                                                      1.25 in
                                                                          0.5 in           Lightbar
         0.375 in Base

                                              5.5 in                               3 in


Figure 4-15: The components and configuration of the base and lightbar for the Watch Winder


                       Preparing the Motor and the Driveshaft
                       Despite a concerted effort to mark and drill the holes accurately, you may
                       still end up with misalignment between the motor and driveshaft, so this
                       build aims to keep the coupling flexible. My solution might not be on the
                       hit parade of industrial engineers, but I used a length of vinyl tubing to
                       couple the motor to the driveshaft. This coupling has been working for
                       more than a year with no sign of deterioration or problems.
                             A 1-inch length of heavy-wall vinyl tubing with an outside diameter of
                       7/16 inches and an inside diameter of 3/16 inches should do the job.
                             It won’t fit the motor shaft or the 1/4-inch threaded shaft without a
                       bit of work, though. (I drove the sales clerk at Lowe’s batty buying six of
                       each size they had in stock.) We simply need to reduce the diameter of the
                       threaded shaft and craft a small bushing for the motor shaft.

                       Trimming the Threaded Shaft
                       First, trim the diameter of the threaded shaft. Clamp a hand-held electric
                       drill in a vise or parallel clamp, using a folded towel to keep from damag-
                       ing the drill, and place the shaft where the drill bit would normally go
                       (see Figure 4-16). Then, turn on the drill, and use a sharp file to trim the
                       shaft.


116   Chapter 4
Figure 4-16: Reducing the diameter of the threaded shaft

      It should take only a minute or two to reduce the shaft diameter to a
little over 3/16 inches for a tight fit on the vinyl tubing.

Creating the Motor Bushing
Next, take a small piece of round stock approximately 3/4 inches long and
3/8 to 1/2 inches in diameter. (I used a 3/8-inch diameter, as it required
less work.) Drill a 11/64-inch (#21) hole in the end approximately 3/8 inches
deep. The bushing hole needs to be as close to the center as possible, so you
might want to mark it with a center punch first (see Figure 4-17).




Figure 4-17: Clamp the shaft of the piece used as the bushing in a vise
or pair of vise-grip pliers, and center punch a mark before drilling the
hole. Get as close to the center as possible.

                                                                           A Watch Winder   117
                       Then, place the short piece of stock you cut in the drill as you did the
                  threaded shaft with the center hole toward the drill. File the end without
                  the hole in it. Reduce the diameter by about 1/4 inches to approximately
                  equal the filed end of the driveshaft.
                       Next, drill a 0.041-inch hole through the bushing, about 3/8 inches
                  from the edge of the bushing.
                       While you’re at it, drill a corresponding hole in the driveshaft. To center
                  punch and drill the driveshaft and the bushing holes, file the end flat so the
                  center punch can find a purchase (see Figure 4-18). These are the holes that
                  will accept the piano wire through the vinyl tubing.




                                     Flat-filed
                                     Center
                                     punch




                  Figure 4-18: The easiest way to drill the holes in the threaded rod and bushing is to
                  file a small flat on the shaft and center punch.

                       Finally, drill a 2.5 mm (#39) hole and tap an M3-05 hole in the bush-
                  ing, perpendicular to the hole drilled for the motor shaft. This will accept a
                  set screw for the motor shaft. If you prefer, you can drill a #43 hole and tap
                  for a 4-40 set screw. This set screw holds the bushing in place on the motor
                  shaft, and the two 0.041-inch holes drilled in the driveshaft and motor
                  bushing, respectively, will pin the vinyl tubing in place with piano wire.

                  Cutting Piano Wire Pins and Completing the Motor Assembly
                  Cut two pieces of 0.039-inch wide piano wire, 1/2 to 5/8 inches long. This
                  can be a bit of a job. I used an abrasive cutoff wheel on a Dremel tool. Using
                  the corner of a small grinding wheel attached to the drill should work to
                  put a groove in the wire. Once you have a groove in the wire, you can snap
                  it by hand. You can also use any sharpening stone to score the wire, and it
                  should easily snap.



118   Chapter 4
    Once that’s done, the rest of the assembly should go easily. First, mount
the bushing to the motor; put a drop of thread-lock liquid on the set screw
before tightening. Then, fit one end of the vinyl tubing over the bushing,
and run the piano wire through the 0.041-inch hole in the bushing. Hold
one end of the wire tightly in a pair of pliers (small vise-grip pliers work
well), and force it through the vinyl, into the hole in the motor bushing,
and into the vinyl on the other side. If this proves difficult, try heating
the piano wire with a small flame, and then it should go through easily.
Figure 4-19 shows the tubing over the motor bushing.


     Motor

                                        Bushing
              Motor shaft




                                          Piano wire   Reduced diameter
                            Set screw                  of bushing with
                                                       vinyl tubing



Figure 4-19: The motor shaft with the bushing comprises half of the transmission to the
winder. The other half is the reduced driveshaft that goes through the bearing and holds
the watch basket.

    Attach the motor mount to the motor using M3×3/8-inch screws.
Next, screw the motor standoffs into the bearing cage; see Figure 4-20 for
how to place them. Take the motor assembly—that is, the motor, mount-
ing plate, bushing, and vinyl—and fit it to the bearing cage standoffs
using M3-05×1/2-inch screws.
    To make the holes in the vinyl for the driveshaft, just install the
driveshaft into the bearing box without the jam nuts, push the vinyl tub-
ing onto it, and install the piano-wire pin as I described in the previous
section. If you are concerned about the piano-wire pins coming out, you
can wrap a wire tie over them or cover them with a piece of tape. (I never
had a problem.) For now, remove the piano-wire pin from the driveshaft
and remove the driveshaft from the bearing box until you’re ready for the
final assembly.




                                                                      A Watch Winder   119
                        Standoffs




                  Figure 4-20: Motor and motor mount connected to bearing box with stand-
                  offs. The standoffs are threaded into the bearing box while the motor mount
                  is fastened with 3 mm × 1/2-inch screws and washers. The bearing box is
                  mounted to stand with 1-inch-long, 1/4-inch × 28 screws and nuts.


                  Making the Watch Basket
                  There are many ways to construct the part of the project that holds the
                  watches. I chose to make my watch basket from acrylic. The construction is
                  relatively straightforward, though it does require some patience. First, take
                  two 5×3/8-inch acrylic disks and carefully mark the center on each. Drill
                  1/4-inch holes in the center of each. Then, on what will be the top disk,
                  mark the rectangles shown in Figure 4-21 (left).
                      If you’ve not done so already, cut the rectangular acrylic pieces I
                  described in the “Parts List” on page 93 for the watch boxes and assemble
                  them following the same instructions given under “Bonding the Acrylic for
                  the Bearing Box” on page 114. (In most of the samples I’ve made, I used
                  1/4-inch acrylic; however, 3/8-inch acrylic works fine.) Then, carefully mark
                  out the openings on the disk (see Figure 4-21). Now, bond the watch baskets
                  to one disk, as shown in Figure 4-22. Then, cut the openings to match up
                  with the inside of the watch baskets.


120   Chapter 4
                                  0.25 in

                            0.25 in
                                                     2 in
                                                            1 in

                 1 in
                               3 in




Figure 4-21: Cut out dimensions for the watch holder basket. This pattern can be down-
loaded as a PDF file from http://www.nostarch.com/arduinoplayground/.




Figure 4-22: The watch holder baskets mounted to the acrylic disk.
Above them is the fully assembled motor, bearing box, and driveshaft.

    The simplest way to cut the rectangles out is to drill a hole at the cor-
ners, being careful not to drill into the watch basket, and use a keyhole
or coping saw (or if you’re careful, a saber saw) to cut the openings. They
have to be cut only on one disk, which will be the top. You can clean up the
edges of the cuts a little with a file or sandpaper, but don’t spend too much
time as it will not be noticeable with the watches and cushions in place.

                                                                        A Watch Winder   121
                       Finally, mount the basket on the driveshaft. First, thread two nuts onto
                  the driveshaft and lock them against each other—that is, tighten one nut
                  against the other. Then, add a washer, followed by the lower disk of the bas-
                  ket, the top assembly with the watch baskets, a washer, and a nut at the top.
                  If you desire, go to the hardware store to search for a decorative nut to cap
                  off the project.

        NOTE      Bonding the bottom disk isn’t necessary if you use locking nuts as I described and
                  tighten the basket securely. I didn’t bond the boxes to the lower disk, and it has not
                  been a problem.

                      At this point, you can mount the finished assembly to the stand using
                  the two decorative 1/4 inch × 28 bolts and nuts. You can also bond the light-
                  bar to the base using acrylic cement and drill the hole for mounting the
                  shield mounting plate.

                  Adding the LEDs
                  You’re just about done. Locate and mount the LEDs on the acrylic any-
                  where you like, and wire them up to the shield. You can see where I placed
                  mine in Figure 4-1. (The way the acrylic conducts the light produces some
                  neat effects.) You may want to drill some blind holes to mount the LEDs
                  in. Simply drill a hole the diameter of the LED but not completely through
                  the acrylic. If you’re careful, you can probably do a neat job in running the
                  wires so they can barely be seen.
                       Because the LEDs are critical to the ultimate appearance of the winder,
                  their placement and mounting is an important component of the finished
                  product. Drilling the holes for mounting the LEDs can be a little tricky
                  because if you bought a variety, they may have slightly different diameters.
                  As a starting point, try 3/16-inch holes for 5 mm LEDs and 25/64-inch
                  holes for 10 mm LEDs. I found the best way to get the right size was to drill
                  a sample hole in a scrap piece of stock and try it before venturing to drill
                  into a finished piece. If the hole is a bit small, a simple touch up with the
                  tapered reamer should fix that. If a hole ends up a little large, try filling it
                  in with some acrylic cement, such as Weld-On 16.
                       If you have some wire-wrap wire and a wire-wrap tool, you can wire-
                  wrap the LEDs to the shield instead of soldering. This makes a neat con-
                  nection to the back of the LEDs and is relatively inconspicuous because of
                  the small diameter of the wire. It also lets you connect the wire close to the
                  LED, as in shown Figure 4-23. If you soldered it, you might risk overheating
                  the junction of the LED.
                       Wire-wrap or solder the leads from the LEDs to the shield. I soldered a
                  header to the shield so that it was easy to wire-wrap or solder the leads from
                  the LEDs to the shield directly. You do have to solder leads from the motor
                  to the other end of the shield, but it should not be a problem.
                       The wires from the Hall effect sensor can be soldered to the shield and
                  to the leads of the sensor. Measure the wires so they fit neatly where you



122   Chapter 4
plan to mount the Hall effect sensor. You can use a connector, but let’s keep
it simple. The sensor itself and the magnet are mechanically mounted using
double-sided foam tape.




Figure 4-23: Wire-wrap wire on an LED. These wires are very fine
(30 gauge) with thin insulation, so they are unobtrusive. Small wire
ties can neaten up the wiring. I suggest marking the LED’s positive
terminal ahead of time, as I’ve done here, and wiping it off later.


Leaving the Components on Display
Now, what to do with the shield and Nano? The theme of this project has
been transparency, so I suggest letting everything hang out: mount the bare
board on standoffs right out in the open with the switch and power jack at
the back (see Figure 4-24).




Figure 4-24: The Nano and shield mounted on the completed Watch Winder.
Only three standoffs were used on the shield.

                                                                       A Watch Winder   123
                      I placed the electronics directly under the bearing box, between the
                  uprights holding the entire assembly to the base. Then, I mounted the
                  board on a separate piece of acrylic screwed to the base with a flat-head
                  4-40 screw.

                  Keeping the Watches in the Basket
                  To hold the watches in the watch basket, I simply cut a block of fine foam
                  sponge, and it worked well. If you want something a little dressier than
                  a sponge, you can sew small pillows that you put the watch band around.
                  I don’t have any sewing ability, so I stuck with the sponge.

        NOTE      The open frame works well overall, but it could collect dust. If you have a fastidious
                  streak, you could build an acrylic box to cover the entire winder from 3/16-inch-thick
                  acrylic sheet. Or you could just buy a can of dust spray, as I did. Some have also sug-
                  gested to me that the entire winder could be mounted on a piece of hardwood, such as
                  walnut or some other decorative hardwood, to add a finishing touch.



     Design Notes
                  Now that you’ve seen how I built the Watch Winder, I’ll walk you through
                  some key design decisions I made that you might want to do differently.

                  Total Rotation Adjustment
                  It’s possible to vary the total number of turns the Watch Winder makes
                  without changing the sketch, though I chose not to do this.
                       You can use a potentiometer to create a variable voltage and input it
                  to one of the analog inputs of the Arduino. Then, you can substitute that
                  value for one of the delays in the sketch to vary the number of revolutions
                  per day. Here’s how to install the potentiometer and the tweaks you’d need
                  to make to the sketch.

                  Hardware Changes
                  Connect the upper and lower terminals of a potentiometer to the positive
                  and negative rails of the system. Solder pads have been included on the
                  shield for this purpose. You needn’t use a full-size potentiometer; a small
                  trimmer (10 turn is best) will do nicely, and it saves a lot of space. Connect
                  the potentiometer’s center pin (in the shield) to an analog pin of the Nano.
                  Because the Hall effect switch uses pin A0, I suggest using analog input A1.
                  Solder points have been provided in the shield.

                  Software Changes
                  On the sketch, there are several things you must do. First, tell the Nano that
                  input A1 is in play. Go to the top of the sketch to add the following:

                  const int revSet = A1;

124   Chapter 4
     Then, a little further, identify the value the potentiometer is set at as
follows:

int revNumber = 0;

    revSet is the arbitrary name I gave to the input A1, and revNumber is the
arbitrary name I gave to the number you will substitute in the sketch for
one of the delays.
    The potentiometer will give values from 0 to 5 volts. Because the analog
input, A1, is connected to a 10-bit ADC, it will generate 1,024 digital values
between 0 and 1,023. In other applications, it’s been necessary to map these
1,024 values to some other set of values. However, in this particular situa-
tion, it’s easiest to use the values as is.
    In the sketch file, move to the line after void loop() { and assign the
value of A1 to revNumber as follows:

revNumber = analogRead(revSet);

     Go back to where we define some of the delays in the sketch. Change

int timer = 500;

to

int timer = 0;

   Finally, go back to where you entered revNumber = analogRead(revSet);
and after that, enter the following:

timer == revNumber;

    Now, each time the sketch calls for the timer value, the revNumber value
should be used automatically, which will give you a wide variation in delay.
The resulting variation runs from 200 to 1,200 revolutions per day.

How Many LEDs to Use and Where to Put Them
I originally imagined the Watch Winder having only two LEDs to indicate
the direction of rotation. The first version used LEDs attached to the motor-
direction pins, D12 and D13, of the Nano (see Figure 4-2). One pin was on
for the duration of rotation in one direction, and vice versa. Red and green
LEDs were used to indicate which direction the winder was going in, like run-
ning lights on a boat.
     But that’s still pretty boring, and there were all those pins sitting there
not doing anything. Furthermore, if you invited a friend over to see your
winder, it would sit there, doing nothing most of the time—and so would
your visitor. So I decided to spice up the project with several more deco-
rative LEDs. I also decided to add more variability by having the sketch


                                                                A Watch Winder   125
                  provide some animation, calling for the watches to turn a varying number
                  of times—sometimes shorter but more often. I even added a “ping-pong
                  effect.”
                       Because the half of my brain dealing with artistic matters apparently
                  never developed, I’ll leave the placement of the LEDs to you. On the unit
                  in Figure 4-1, there are four in the bearing box and five in a lightbar, but
                  you could place them anywhere.
                       I arbitrarily chose nine LED channels, and in some cases, I used two
                  LEDs per channel. I used two LEDs for each direction of the motor—the
                  two channels, D12 and D13, that serve double duty driving the LEDs as well
                  as driving the motor. D2 and D13 power two LEDs each. D4 through D10
                  power the other LEDs, the two behind the watch basket—D9 and D10, each
                  with two LEDs—and the five out in front in the lightbar—D4–D8. D11 is
                  reserved for future developments you may want to include.

                  Motor Voltage
                  One beta tester of the Watch Winder experienced difficulty running a 6V
                  motor from the 5V supply. The complaint was insufficient torque. The solu-
                  tion, should you run into this problem, is to run the second supply (VCC2)
                  of the H-bridge directly from the 9V supply. To do this, you are either
                  going to have to cut the traces to pin 8 or remove that pin and solder it
                  separately to the 9V supply. Because the motor runs so intermittently, there
                  is little risk of burning it out. It may not be an elegant solution, but it works.
                  Incidentally, out of about 20 different motors sampled, that was the only
                  one that experienced that problem. And as addressed earlier, the higher
                  speed of the motor at the higher voltage will have no, or little, effect on the
                  number of rotations.

                  How Many Rotations Does the Watch Winder Make?
                  If you really have to know how many rotations the Watch Winder makes,
                  here’s a solution. The internal counter serves to sequence the sketch but
                  does not accurately reflect the total number of revolutions the motor makes.
                  While we could have counted the rotations internally, it would have required
                  a separate readout or being hooked up to the serial monitor. But if you need
                  to keep count, you can add a small external counter. Because you will need it
                  only on rare occasions when changing the revolution count, you can plug it
                  in—a provision is made in the shield—when you need it and save it for other
                  projects when you don’t. The external counter in Figure 4-25 is self-powered
                  and costs under $8. See the “Parts List” on page 93 for details.
                       The external counter is not required; however, it could be a nice acces-
                  sory to include for this and other projects. It is not included in the design
                  because it is used only on occasion and can be plugged in. I used a two-pin
                  female header on the shield—the connections are labeled GND and X-ctr
                  on the screen layer of the shield—and included a two-pin plug on wires
                  from the counter. The count connection goes from ground to pin 4 of the
                  counter and from the Hall effect sensor to pin 1. You can add a reset button


126   Chapter 4
                  from ground to pin 3 of the counter. The counter comes from the manufac-
                  turer with little information, so Figure 4-25 shows a view from the back with
                  the pushbutton reset on the counter on your right.




                                                Pin 1




                                                                                    Pin 4


Figure 4-25: An external hardware counter with a reset button added

                      Even if this Watch Winder didn’t keep my watches wound, I think it
                  would still be a great sculpture. And when you are done with this project,
                  perhaps your next Arduino build will be just that: a kinetic, blinking, mov-
                  ing piece of art.




                                                                              A Watch Winder   127
