                                                                                          6
                          TO ERR IS
                           HUMAN
                         Dealing with the Inevitable—
                           Error Conditions in Code




In this chapter:                          We know that the only way to avoid error is to detect it,
                                          that the only way to detect it is to be free to enquire.
   The types of errors we                                                     —J. Robert Oppenheimer
   encounter
   Dealing with errors correctly          At some point in life, everyone has this epiphany:
                                          The world doesn’t work as you expect it to. My one-year-
   How to raise errors
                                          old friend Tom learned this when climbing a chair
   Learning to program in the             four times his size. He expected to get to the top.
   face of uncertainty                    The actual result surprised him: He ended up
                                          under a pile of furniture.
                                               Is the world broken? Is it wrong? No. The
                                          world has plodded happily along its way for the
                                          last few million years and looks set to continue
                                          for the foreseeable future. It’s our expectations that
                                          are wrong and need to be adjusted. As they say:
                                          Bad things happen, so deal with it. We must write
                                          code that deals with the Real World and its
                                          unexpected ways.
                                               This is particularly difficult because the world
                                          mostly works as we’d expect it to, constantly lulling
                                          us into a false sense of security. The human brain is


                                           From Code Craft
                         No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                    wired to cope, with built-in fail-safes. If someone bricks up your front door,
                    your brain will process the problem, and you’ll stop before walking into an
                    unexpected wall. But programs are not so clever; we have to tell them where
                    the brick walls are and what to do when they hit one.
                         Don’t presume that everything in your program will always run smoothly.
                    The world doesn’t always work as you’d expect it to: You must handle all
                    possible error conditions in your code. It sounds simple enough, but that
                    statement leads to a world of pain.

     From Whence It Came
                                               To expect the unexpected shows
                                               a thoroughly modern intellect.
                                                       —Oscar Wilde
                    Errors can and will occur. Undersirable results can arise from almost any
                    operation. They are distinct from bugs in a faulty program because you know
                    beforehand that an error can occur. For example, the database file you want
                    to open might have been deleted, a disk could fill up at any time and your
                    next save operation might fail, or the web service you’re accessing might not
                    currently be available.
                         If you don’t write code to handle these error conditions, you will almost
                    certainly end up with a bug; your program will not always work as you intend
                    it to. But if the error happens only rarely, it will probably be a very subtle bug!
                    We’ll look at bugs in Chapter 9.
                         An error may occur for one of a thousand reasons, but it will fall into one
                    of these three categories:
                    User error
                       The stupid user manhandled your lovely program. Perhaps he provided
                       the wrong input or attempted an operation that’s absolutely absurd.
                       A good program will point out the mistake and help the user rectify it.
                       It won’t insult him or whine in an incomprehensible manner.
                    Programmer error
                       The user pushed all the right buttons, but the code is broken. This is the
                       consequence of a bug elsewhere, a fault the programmer introduced
                       that the user can do nothing about (except to try and avoid it in the
                       future). This kind of error should (ideally) never occur.
                           There’s a cycle here: Unhandled errors can cause bugs. And those
                       bugs might result in further error conditions occurring elsewhere in your
                       code. This is why we consider defensive programming an important
                       practice.
                    Exceptional circumstances
                       The user pushed all the right buttons, and the programmer didn’t mess up.
                       Fate’s fickle finger intervened, and we ran into something that couldn’t be
                       avoided. Perhaps a network connection failed, we ran out of printer ink,
                       or there’s no hard disk space left.


90   C ha pt er 6
                                               From Code Craft
                             No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                   We need a well-defined strategy to manage each kind of error in our code.
              An error may be detected and reported to the user in a pop-up message box,
              or it may be detected by a middle-tier code layer and signaled to the client
              code programmatically. The same principles apply in both cases: whether a
              human chooses how to handle the problem or your code makes a decision—
              someone is responsible for acknowledging and acting on errors.

KEY CONCEPT   Take error handling seriously. The stability of your code rests on it.
                  Errors are raised by subordinate components and communicated upward,
              to be dealt with by the caller. They are reported in a number of ways; we’ll
              look at these in the next section. To take control of program execution, we
              must be able to:

                  Raise an error when something goes wrong
                  Detect all possible error reports
                  Handle them appropriately
                  Propagate errors we can’t handle

                   Errors are hard to deal with. The error you encounter is often not
              related to what you were doing at the time (most fall under the “exceptional
              circumstances” category). They are also tedious to deal with—we want to
              focus on what our program should be doing, not on how it may go wrong.
              However, without good error management, your program will be brittle—
              built upon sand, not rock. At the first sign of wind or rain, it will collapse.

   Error-Reporting Mechanisms
              There are several common strategies for propagating error information to
              client code. You’ll run into code that uses each of them, so you must know
              how to speak every dialect. Observe how these error-reporting techniques
              compare, and notice which situations call for each mechanism.
                   Each mechanism has different implications for the locality of error. An error
              is local in time if it is discovered very soon after it is created. An error is local
              in space if it is identified very close to (or even at) the site where it actually
              manifests. Some approaches specifically aim to reduce the locality of error to
              make it easier to see what’s going on (e.g., error codes). Others aim to extend
              the locality of error so that normal code doesn’t get entwined with error-
              handling logic (e.g., exceptions).
                   The favored reporting mechanism is often an architectural decision.
              The architect might consider it important to define a homogeneous hierarchy
              of exception classes or a central list of shared reason codes to unify error-
              handling code.

              No Reporting
              The simplest error-reporting mechanism is don’t bother. This works wonderfully
              in cases where you want your program to behave in bizarre and unpredictable
              ways and to crash randomly.

                                                                                       T o Er r Is H um an   91
                                         From Code Craft
                       No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                        If you encounter an error and don’t know what to do about it, blindly
                    ignoring it is not a viable option. You probably can’t continue the function’s
                    work, but returning without fulfilling your function’s contract will leave the
                    world in an undefined and inconsistent state.

KEY CONCEPT         Never ignore an error condition. If you don’t know how to handle the problem, signal a
                    failure back up to the calling code. Don’t sweep an error under the rug and hope for the best.
                        An alternative to ignoring errors is to instantly abort the program upon
                    encountering a problem. It’s easier than handling errors throughout the code,
                    but hardly a well-engineered solution!

                    Return Values
                    The next most simple mechanism is to return a success/failure value from
                    your function. A boolean return value provides a simple yes or no answer.
                    A more advanced approach enumerates all the possible exit statuses and
                    returns a corresponding reason code. One value means success; the rest repre-
                    sent the many and varied abortive cases. This enumeration may be shared
                    across the whole codebase, in which case your function returns a subset of
                    the available values. You should therefore document what the caller can
                    expect.
                          While this works well for procedures that don’t return data, passing error
                    codes back with returned data gets messy. If int count() walks down a linked
                    list and returns the number of elements, how can it signify a list structure
                    corruption? There are three approaches:

                         Return a compound data type (or tuple) containing both the return
                         value and an error code. This is rather clumsy in the popular C-like
                         languages and is seldom seen in them.
                         Pass the error code back through a function parameter. In C++ or .NET,
                         this parameter would be passed by reference. In C you’d direct the vari-
                         able access through pointers. This approach is ugly and nonintuitive;
                         there is no syntactic way to distinguish a return value from a parameter.
                         Alternatively, reserve a range of return values to signify failure. The count
                         example can nominate all negative numbers as error reason codes; they’d
                         be meaningless answers anyway. Negative numbers are a common choice
                         for this. Pointer return values may be given a specific invalid value, which
                         by convention is zero (or NULL ). In Java and C#, you can return a null
                         object reference.
                             This technique doesn’t always work well. Sometimes it’s hard to
                         reserve an error range—all return values are equally meaningful and
                         equally likely. It also has the side effect of reducing the available range of
                         success values; the use of negative values reduces the possible positive
                         values by an order of magnitude.1


                    1
                     If you used an unsigned int then the number of values available would increase by a power of
                    two, reusing the signed int’s sign bit.

92   C ha pt er 6
                                                From Code Craft
                              No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
Error Status Variables
This method attempts to manage the contention between a function’s return
value and its error status report. Rather than return a reason code, the function
sets a shared global error variable. After calling the function, you must then
inspect this status variable to find out whether or not it completed successfully.
     The shared variable reduces confusion and clutter in the function’s sig-
nature, and it doesn’t restrict the return value’s data range at all. However,
errors signaled through a separate channel are much easier to miss or willfully
ignore. A shared global variable also has nasty thread safety implications.
     The C standard library employs this technique with its errno variable.
It has very subtle semantics: Before using any standard library facility, you
must manually clear errno. Nothing ever sets a succeeded value; only failures
touch errno. This is a common source of bugs, and it makes calling each library
function tedious. To add insult to injury, not all C standard library functions
use errno, so it is less than consistent.
     This technique is functionally equivalent to using return values, but it
has enough disadvantages to make you avoid it. Don’t write your own error
reports this way, and use existing implementations with the utmost care.

Exceptions
Exceptions are a language facility for managing errors; not all languages sup-
port exceptions. Exceptions help to distinguish the normal flow of execution
from exceptional cases—when a function has failed and cannot honor its con-
tract. When your code encounters a problem that it can’t handle, it stops dead
and throws up an exception—an object representing the error. The language
run time then automatically steps back up the call stack until it finds some
exception-handling code. The error lands there, for the program to deal with.
    There are two operational models, distinguished by what happens after
an exception is handled:
The termination model
   Execution continues after the handler that caught the exception. This
   behavior is provided by C++, .NET, and Java.
The resumption model
   Execution resumes where the exception was raised.
    The former model is easier to reason about, but it doesn’t give ultimate
control. It only allows error handling (you can execute code when you notice
an error), not fault rectification (a chance to fix the problem and try again).
    An exception cannot be ignored. If it isn’t caught and handled, it will
propagate to the very top of the call stack and will usually stop the program
dead in its tracks. The language run time automatically cleans up as it unwinds




                                                                 T o Er r Is H um an   93
                           From Code Craft
         No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                            W H I S T LE - S T OP T OU R O F E X C EP T I ON S A F ET Y

                         Resilient code must be exception safe. It must work correctly (for some definition of
                         correctly, which we’ll investigate below), no matter what exceptions come its way.
                         This is true regardless of whether or not the code catches any exceptions itself.
                            Exception-neutral code propagates all exceptions up to the caller; it won’t
                         consume or change anything. This is an important concept for generic programs like
                         C++ template code—the template types may generate all sorts of exceptions that
                         template implementors don’t understand.
                            There are several different levels of exception safety. They are described in terms
                         of guarantees to the calling code. These guarantees are:
                         Basic guarantee
                           If exceptions occur in a function (resulting from an operation you perform or the
                           call of another function), it will not leak resources. The code state will be consistent
                           (i.e., it can still be used correctly), but it will not necessarily leave in a known state.
                           For example: A member function should add 10 items to a container, but an
                           exception propagates through it. The container is still usable; maybe no objects
                           were inserted, maybe all 10 were, or perhaps every other object was added.
                         Strong guarantee
                            This is far more strict than the basic guarantee. If an exception propagates through
                            your code, the program state remains completely unchanged. No object is altered,
                            no global variables changed, nothing. In the example above, nothing was inserted
                            into the container.
                         Nothrow guarantee
                           The final guarantee is the most restrictive: that an operation can never throw an
                           exception. If we are exception neutral, then this implies the function cannot do
                           anything else that might throw an exception.
                              Which guarantee you provide is entirely your choice. The more restrictive
                           the guarantee, the more widely (re)usable the code is. In order to implement the
                           strong guarantee, you will generally need a number of functions providing the
                           nothrow guarantee.
                              Most notably, every destructor you write must honor the nothrow guarantee.*
                           Otherwise, all exception handling bets are off. In the presence of an exception,
                           object destructors are called automatically as the stack is unwound. Raising an
                           exception while handling an exception is not permissible.

                         *That’s the case in C++ and Java, at least. C# stupidly called ~X() a destructor, even though it
                         was a finalizer in disguise. Throwing an exception in a C# destructor has different implications.




                    the call stack. This makes exceptions a tidier and safer alternative to hand-
                    crafted error-handling code. However, throwing exceptions through sloppy
                    code can lead to memory leaks and problems with resource cleanup.2 You
                    must take care to write exception-safe code. The sidebar explains what this
                    means in more detail.
                        The code that handles an exception is distinct from the code that
                    raises it, and it may be arbitrarily far away. Exceptions are usually provided
                    by OO languages, where errors are defined by a hierarchy of exception classes.

                    2
                      For example, you could allocate a block of memory and then exit early as an exception
                    propagates through. The allocated memory would leak. This kind of problem makes writing
                    code in the face of exceptions a complex business.

94   C ha pt er 6
                                                From Code Craft
                              No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
        A handler can elect to catch a quite specific class of error (by accepting a
        leaf class) or a more general category of error (by accepting a base class).
        Exceptions are particularly useful for signaling errors in a constructor.
             Exceptions don’t come for free; the language support incurs a perfor-
        mance penalty. In practice, this isn’t significant and only manifests around
        exception-handling statements—exception handlers reduce the compiler’s
        optimization opportunities. This doesn’t mean that exceptions are flawed;
        their expense is justified compared to the cost of not doing any error handling!

        Signals
        Signals are a more extreme reporting mechanism, largely used for errors sent
        by the execution environment to the running program. The operating system
        traps a number of exceptional events, like a floating point exception triggered
        by the maths coprocessor. These well-defined error events are delivered to
        the application in signals that interrupt the program’s normal flow of execu-
        tion, jumping into a nominated signal handler function. Your program could
        receive a signal at any time, and the code must be able to cope with this. When
        the signal handler completes, program execution continues at the point it was
        interrupted.
            Signals are the software equivalent of a hardware interrupt. They are a
        Unix concept, now provided on most platforms (a basic version is part of the
        ISO C standard [ISO99]). The operating system provides sensible default
        handlers for each signal, some of which do nothing, others of which abort
        the program with a neat error message. You can override these with your own
        handler.
            The defined C signal events include program termination, execution
        suspend/continue requests, and math errors. Some environments extend
        the basic list with many more events.

Detecting Errors
        How you detect an error obviously depends on the mechanism reporting it.
        In practical terms, this means:
        Return values
           You determine whether a function failed by looking at its return code.
           This failure test is bound tightly to the act of calling the function;
           by making the call, you are implicitly checking its success. Whether or
           not you do anything with that information is up to you.
        Error status variables
            After calling a function, you must inspect the error status variable. If it
            follows C’s errno model of operation, you don’t actually need to test for
            errors after every single function call. First reset errno , and then call any
            number of standard library functions back-to-back. Afterward, inspect
            errno . If it contains an error value, then one of those functions failed.
            Of course, you don’t know what fell over, but if you don’t care, then
            this is a streamlined error-detection approach.

                                                                         T o Er r Is H um an   95
                                    From Code Craft
                  No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                    Exceptions
                       If an exception propagates out of a subordinate function, you can choose
                       to catch and handle it or to ignore it and let the exception flow up a level.
                       You can only make an informed choice when you know what kinds of
                       exceptions might be thrown. You’ll only know this if it has been docu-
                       mented (and if you trust the documentation).
                           Java’s exception implementation places this documentation in the
                       code itself. The programmer has to write an exception specification for every
                       method, describing what it can throw; it is a part of the function’s signa-
                       ture. Java is the only mainstream language to enforce this approach.
                       You cannot leak an exception that isn’t in the list, because the compiler
                       performs static checking to prevent it.3
                    Signals
                        There’s only one way to detect a signal: Install a hander for it. There’s no
                        obligation. You can also choose not to install any signal handlers at all
                        and accept the default behavior.
                       As various pieces of code converge in a large system, you will probably
                    need to detect errors in more than one way, even within a single function.
                    Whichever detection mechanism you use, the key point is this:

KEY CONCEPT         Never ignore any errors that might be reported to you. If an error report channel exists,
                    it’s there for a reason.
                         It is good practice to always write error-detection scaffolding—even if
                    an error has no implication for the rest of your code. This makes it clear to a
                    maintenance programmer that you know a function may fail and have con-
                    sciously chosen to ignore any failures.
                         When you let an exception propagate through your code, you are not
                    ignoring it—you can’t ignore an exception. You are allowing it to be handled
                    by a higher level. The philosophy of exception handling is quite different in
                    this respect. It’s less clear what the most appropriate way to document this is—
                    should you write a try/catch block that simply rethrows the exception, should
                    you write a comment claiming that the code is exception safe, or should you
                    do nothing? I’d favor documenting the exception behavior.

     Handling Errors
                                                    Love truth, and pardon error.
                                                             —Voltaire
                    Errors happen. We’ve seen how to discover them and when to do so. The
                    question now is: What do you do about them? This is the hard part. The
                    answer largely depends on circumstance and the gravity of an error—
                    whether it’s possible to rectify the problem and retry the operation or to
                    carry on regardless. Often there is no such luxury; the error may even


                    3
                      C++ also supports exception specifications, but leaves their use optional. It’s idiomatic to avoid
                    them—for performance reasons, among others. Unlike Java, they are enforced at run time.

96   C ha pt er 6
                                                 From Code Craft
                               No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
herald the beginning of the end. The best you can do is clean up and
exit sharply, before anything else goes wrong.
     To make this kind of decision, you must be informed. You need to know
a few key pieces of information about the error:
Where it came from
   This is quite distinct from where it’s going to be handled. Is the source a
   core system component or a peripheral module? This information may
   be encoded in the error report; if not, you can figure it out manually.
What you were trying to do
   What provoked the error? This may give a clue toward any remedial
   action. Error reporting seldom contains this kind of information, but
   you can figure out which function was called from the context.
Why it went wrong
   What is the nature of the problem? You need to know exactly what
   happened, not just a general class of error. How much of the erroneous
   operation completed? All or none are nice answers, but generally, the
   program will be in some indeterminate state between the two.
When it happened
   This is the locality of the error in time. Has the system only just failed,
   or is a problem two hours old finally being felt?
The severity of the error
   Some problems are more serious than others, but when detected, one
   error is equivalent to another—you can’t continue without understand-
   ing and managing the problem. Error severity is usually determined by the
   caller, based on how easy it will be to recover or work around the error.
How to fix it
   This may be obvious (e.g., insert a floppy disk and retry) or not (e.g., you
   need to modify the function parameters so they are consistent). More often
   than not, you have to infer this knowledge from the other information
   you have.
    Given this depth of information, you can formulate a strategy to handle
each error. Forgetting to insert a handler for any potential error will lead to a
bug, and it might turn out to be a bug that is hard to exercise and hard to track
down—so think about every error condition carefully.

When to Deal with Errors
When should you handle each error? This can be separate from when it’s
detected. There are two schools of thought.
As soon as possible
    Handle each error as you detect it. Since the error is handled near
    to its cause, you retain important contextual information, making the
    error-handling code clearer. This is a well-known self-documenting code


                                                                T o Er r Is H um an   97
                          From Code Craft
        No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                        technique. Managing each error near its source means that control
                        passes through less code in an invalid state.
                           This is usually the best option for functions that return error codes.
                    As late as possible
                        Alternatively, you could defer error handling for as long as possible. This
                        recognizes that code detecting an error rarely knows what to do about it.
                        It often depends on the context in which it is used: A missing file error
                        may be reported to the user when loading a document but silently swal-
                        lowed when hunting for a preferences file.
                             Exceptions are ideal for this; you can pass an exception through each
                        level until you know how to deal with the error. This separation of detec-
                        tion and handling may be clearer, but it can make code more complex.
                        It’s not obvious that you are deliberately deferring error handling, and
                        it’s not clear where an error came from when you do finally handle it.
                             In theory, it’s nice to separate “business logic” from error handling.
                        But often you can’t, as cleanup is necessarily entwined with that business
                        logic, and it can be more tortuous to write the two separately. However,
                        centralized error-handling code has advantages: You know where to look
                        for it, and you can put the abort/continue policy in one place rather than
                        scatter it through many functions.
                         Thomas Jefferson once declared, “Delay is preferable to error.” There is
                    truth there; the actual existence of error handling is far more important than
                    when an error is handled. Nevertheless, choose a compromise that’s close
                    enough to prevent obscure and out-of-context error handling, while being
                    far enough away to not cloud normal code with roundabout paths and error
                    handling dead ends.

KEY CONCEPT         Handle each error in the most appropriate context, as soon as you know enough about
                    it to deal with it correctly.

                    Possible Reactions
                    You’ve caught an error. You’re poised to handle it. What are you going to do
                    now? Hopefully, whatever is required for correct program operation. While
                    we can’t list every recovery technique under the sun, here are the common
                    reactions to consider.
                    Logging
                       Any reasonably large project should already be employing a logging
                       facility. It allows you to collect important trace information, and is an
                       entry point for the investigation of nasty problems.
                           The log exists to record interesting events in the life of the program,
                       to allow you to delve into its inner workings and reconstruct paths of
                       execution. For this reason, all errors you encounter should be detailed
                       in the program log; they are some of the most interesting and telling
                       events of all. Aim to capture all pertinent information—as much of the
                       previous list as you can.


98   C ha pt er 6
                                               From Code Craft
                             No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                      For really obscure errors that predict catastrophic disaster, it may be
                  a good idea to get the program to “phone home”—to transmit either a
                  snapshot of itself or a copy of the error log to the developers for further
                  investigation.
                      What you do after logging is another matter.
              Reporting
                 A program should only report an error to the user when there’s nothing
                 left to do. The user does not need to be bombarded by a thousand small
                 nuggets of useless information or badgered by a raft of pointless questions.
                 Save the interaction for when it’s really vital. Don’t report when you
                 encounter a recoverable situation. By all means, log the event, but keep
                 quiet about it. Provide a mechanism that enables users to read the event
                 log if you think one day they might care.
                      There are some problems that only the user can fix. For these, it is
                 good practice to report the problem immediately, in order to allow the
                 user the best chance to resolve the situation or else decide how to
                 continue.
                      Of course, this kind of reporting depends on whether or not the
                 program is interactive. Deeply embedded systems are expected to cope
                 on their own; it’s hard to pop up a dialog box on a washing machine.
              Recovery
                 Sometimes your only course of action is to stop immediately. But not all
                 errors spell doom. If your program saves a file, one day the disk will fill
                 up, and the save operation will fail. The user expects your program to
                 continue happily, so be prepared.
                      If your code encounters an error and doesn’t know what to do about
                 it, pass the error upward. It’s more than likely your caller will have the
                 ability to recover.
              Ignore
                  I only include this for completeness. Hopefully by now you’ve learned to
                  scorn the very suggestion of ignoring an error. If you choose to forget all
                  about handling it and to just continue with your fingers crossed, good luck.
                  This is where most of the bugs in any software package will come from.
                  Ignoring an error whose occurrence may cause the system to misbehave
                  inevitably leads to hours of debugging.
                      You can, however, write code that allows you to do nothing when an
                  error crops up. Is that a blatant contradiction? No. It is possible to write
                  code that copes with an inconsistent world, that can carry on correctly
                  in the face of an error—but it often gets quite convoluted. If you adopt
                  this approach, you must make it obvious in the code. Don’t risk having
                  it misinterpreted as ignorant and incorrect.

KEY CONCEPT   Ignoring errors does not save time. You’ll spend far longer working out the cause of bad
              program behavior than you ever would have spent writing the error handler.




                                                                                    T o Er r Is H um an   99
                                         From Code Craft
                       No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                      Propagate
                         When a subordinate function call fails, you probably can’t carry on, but
                         you might not know what else to do. The only option is to clean up and
                         propagate the error report upward. You have options. There are two
                         ways to propagate an error:
                               Export the same error information you were fed (return the same
                               reason code or propagate exceptions).
                               Reinterpret the information, sending a more meaningful message to
                               the next level up (return a different reason code or catch and wrap
                               up exceptions).
                               Ask yourself this question: Does the error relate to a concept exposed
                          through the module interface? If so, it’s okay to propagate that same error.
                          Otherwise, recast it in the appropriate light, choosing an error report that
                          makes sense in the context of your module’s interface. This is a good
                          self-documenting code technique.

                      Code Implications
                      Show me the code! Let’s spend some time investigating the implications of error
                      handling in our code. As we’ll see, it is not easy to write good error handling
                      that doesn’t twist and warp the underlying program logic.
                           The first piece of code we’ll look at is a common error handling structure.
                      Yet it isn’t a particularly intelligent approach for writing error-tolerant code.
                      The aim is to call three functions sequentially—each of which may fail—and
                      perform some intermediate calculations along the way. Spot the problems
                      with this:

                      void nastyErrorHandling()
                      {
                          if (operationOne())
                          {
                              ... do something ...
                              if (operationTwo())
                              {
                                  ... do something else ...
                                  if (operationThree())
                                  {
                                      ... do more ...
                                  }
                              }
                          }
                      }

                          Syntactically it’s fine; the code will work. Practically, it’s an unpleasant style
                      to maintain. The more operations you need to perform, the more deeply
                      nested the code gets and the harder it is to read. This kind of error handling
                      quickly leads to a rat’s nest of conditional statements. It doesn’t reflect the
                      actions of the code very well; each intermediate calculation could be con-
                      sidered the same level of importance, yet they are nested at different levels.

100   C h ap te r 6
                                                 From Code Craft
                               No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                    C RA F T I N G E R R O R M ES S A G E S

    Inevitably, your code will encounter errors that the user must sort out. Human interven-
    tion may be the only option; your code can’t insert a floppy disk or switch on the
    printer by itself. (If it can, you’ll make a fortune!)
       If you’re going to whine at the user, there are a few general points to bear in mind:
    • Users don’t think like programmers, so present information the way they’d expect.
      When displaying the free space on a disk, you might report Disk space: 10K.
      But if there’s no space left, a zero could be misread as OK—and the user will not be
      able to fathom why he can’t save a file when the program says everything’s fine.
    • Make sure your messages aren’t too cryptic. You might understand them, but can
      your computer-illiterate granny? (It doesn’t matter if your granny won’t use this
      program—someone with a lower intellect almost certainly will.)
    • Don’t present meaningless error codes. No user knows what to do when faced
      with an Error code 707E . It is, however, valuable to provide such codes as
      “additional info”—they can be quoted to tech support or looked up more easily
      on a web search.
    • Distinguish dire errors from mere warnings. Incorporate this information in the
      message text (perhaps with an Error: prefix), and emphasize it in message boxes
      with an accompanying icon.
    • Only ask a question (even a simple one like Continue: Yes/No?) if the user fully
      understands the ramifications of each choice. Explain it if necessary, and make
      it clear what the consequence of each answer is.
        What you present to the user will be determined by interface constraints and
    application or OS style guides. If your company has user interface engineers, then
    it’s their job to make these decisions. Work with them.



    Can we avoid these problems? Yes—there are a few alternatives. The first
variant flattens the nesting. It is semantically equivalent, but it introduces
some new complexity, since flow control is now dependent on the value of a
new status variable, ok:

void flattenedErrorHandling()
{
    bool ok = operationOne();
    if (ok)
    {
        ... do something ...
        ok = operationTwo();
    }
    if (ok)
    {
        ... do something else ...
        ok = operationThree();
    }
    if (ok)
    {
        ... do more ...
    }


                                                                             T o Er r I s Hu ma n   101
                           From Code Craft
         No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                           if (!ok)
                           {
                               ... clean up after errors ...
                           }
                      }

                           We’ve also added an opportunity to clean up after any errors. Is that
                      sufficient to mop up all failures? Probably not; the necessary cleanup may
                      depend on how far we got through the function before lightning struck.
                      There are two cleanup approaches:

                           Perform a little cleanup after each operation that may fail, then return
                           early. This inevitably leads to duplication of cleanup code. The more work
                           you’ve done, the more you have to clean up, so each exit point will need
                           to do gradually more unpicking.
                               If each operation in our example allocates some memory, each early-
                           exit point will have to release all allocations made to date. The further
                           in, the more releases. That will lead to some quite dense and repetitive
                           error-handling code, which makes the function far larger and far harder
                           to understand.
                           Write the cleanup code once, at the end of the function, but write it in such
                           a way as to only clean up what’s dirty. This is neater, but if you inadvertently
                           insert an early return in the middle of the function, the cleanup code will
                           be bypassed.

                          If you’re not overly concerned about writing Single Entry, Single Exit (SESE)
                      functions, this next example removes the reliance on a separate control flow
                      variable.4 We do lose the cleanup code again, though. Simplicity renders this
                      a better description of the actual intent:

                      void shortCircuitErrorHandling()
                      {
                          if (!operationOne()) return;
                          ... do something ...
                          if (!operationTwo()) return;
                          ... do something else ...
                          if (!operationThree()) return;
                          ... do more ...
                      }

                          A combination of this short-circuit exit with the requirement for cleanup
                      leads to the following approach, especially seen in low-level systems code.
                      Some people advocate it as the only valid use for the maligned goto. I’m still
                      not convinced.



                      4
                       Although this clearly isn’t SESE, I contend that the previous example isn’t, either. There is only
                      one exit point, at the end, but the contrived control flow is simulating early exit—it might as well
                      have multiple exits. This is a good example of how being bound by a rule like SESE can lead to
                      bad code, unless you think carefully about what you’re doing.

102   C h ap te r 6
                                                  From Code Craft
                                No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
void gotoHell()
{
    if (!operationOne()) goto error;
    ... do something ...
    if (!operationTwo()) goto error;
    ... do something else ...
    if (!operationThree()) goto error;
    ... do more ...
    return;
error:
    ... clean up after errors ...
}

     You can avoid such monstrous code in C++ using Resource Acquisition Is
Initialization (RAII) techniques like smart pointers. (Stroustrup 97) This has
the bonus of providing exception safety—when an exception terminates
your function prematurely, resources are automatically deallocated. These
techniques avoid a lot of the problems we’ve seen above, moving complexity
to a separate flow of control.
     The same example using exceptions would look like this (in C++, Java,
and C#), presuming that all subordinate functions do not return error codes
but instead throw exceptions:

void exceptionalHandling()
{
    try
    {
        operationOne();
        ... do something ...
        operationTwo();
        ... do something else ...
        operationThree();
        ... do more ...
    }
    catch (...)
    {
        ... clean up after errors ...
    }
}

      This is only a basic exception example, but it shows just how neat excep-
tions can be. A sound code design might not need the try/catch block at all
if it ensures that no resource is leaked and leaves error handling to a higher
level. But alas, writing good code in the face of exceptions requires an under-
standing of principles beyond the scope of this chapter.




                                                              T o Er r I s Hu ma n   103
                          From Code Craft
        No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
      Raising Hell
                       We’ve put up with other people’s errors for long enough. It’s time to turn
                       the tables and play the bad guy: Let’s raise some errors. When writing a
                       function, erroneous things will happen that you’ll need to signal to your
                       caller. Make sure you do—don’t silently swallow any failure. Even if you’re
                       sure that the caller won’t know what to do in the face of the problem, it
                       must remain informed. Don’t write code that lies and pretends to be doing
                       something it’s not.
                            Which reporting mechanism should you use? It’s largely an architectural
                       choice; obey the project conventions and the common language idioms. In
                       languages with the facility, it is common to favor exceptions, but only use them
                       if the rest of the project does. Java and C# really leave you with no choice;
                       exceptions are buried deep in their execution run times. A C++ architecture
                       may choose to forego this facility to achieve portability with platforms that
                       have no exception support or to interface with older C code.
                            We’ve already seen strategies for propagating errors from subordinate
                       function calls. Our main concern here is reporting fresh problems encountered
                       during execution. How you determine these errors is your own business, but
                       when reporting them, consider the following:

                           Have you cleaned up appropriately first? Reliable code doesn’t leak
                           resources or leave the world in an inconsistent state, even when an
                           error occurs, unless it’s really unavoidable. If you do either of these
                           things, it must be documented carefully. Consider what will happen
                           the next time your code is called if this error has manifested. Ensure
                           it will still work.
                           Don’t leak inappropriate information to the outside world in your error
                           reports. Only return useful information that the caller understands and
                           can act on.
                           Use exceptions correctly. Don’t throw an exception for unusual return
                           values—the rare but not erroneous cases. Only use exceptions to signal
                           circumstances where a function is not able to meet its contract. Don’t
                           use them non-idiomatically (i.e., for flow control).
                           Consider using assertions (see “Constraints” on page 16) if you’re
                           trapping an error that should never happen in the normal course of
                           program execution, a genuine programming error. Exceptions are a
                           valid choice for this too—some assertion mechanisms can be config-
                           ured to throw exceptions when they trigger.
                           If you can pull forward any tests to compile time, then do so. The sooner
                           you detect and rectify an error, the less hassle it can cause.
                           Make it hard for people to ignore your errors. Given half a chance, some-
                           one will use your code badly. Exceptions are good for this—you have to
                           act deliberately to hide an exception.




104    C h ap te r 6
                                                 From Code Craft
                               No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
           What kind of errors should you be looking out for? This obviously depends
       on what the function is doing. Here’s a checklist of the general kinds of error
       checks you should make in each function:

               Check all function parameters. Ensure you have been given correct
               and consistent input. Consider using assertions for this, depending on
               how strictly your contract was written. (Is it an offense to supply bad
               parameters?)
               Check that invariants are satisfied at interesting points in execution.
               Check all values from external sources for validity before you use them. File
               contents and interactive input must be sensible, with no missing pieces.
               Check the return status of all system and other subordinate function calls.



                                 A N EX C E P T I O N T O T H E RU L E

               Exceptions are a powerful error reporting mechanism. Used well, they can simplify
               your code greatly while helping you to write robust software. In the wrong hands,
               though, they are a deadly weapon.
                   I once worked on a project where it was routine for programmers to break a
               while loop or end recursion by throwing an exception, using it as a non-local goto.
               It’s an intersting idea, and kind of cute when you first see it. But this behavior is nothing
               more than an abuse of exceptions: It isn’t what exceptions are idiomatically used for.
               More than one critical bug was caused by a maintenance programmer not under-
               standing the flow of control through a complex, magically terminated loop.
                   Follow the idioms of your language, and don’t write cute code for the sake of it.




Managing Errors
       The common principle uniting the raising and handling of errors is to have a
       consistent strategy for dealing with failure, wherever it manifests. These are
       general considerations for managing the occurrence, detection, and handling
       of program errors:

               Avoid things that could cause errors. Can you do something that is
               guaranteed to work, instead? For example, avoid allocation errors by
               reserving enough resource beforehand. With an assured pool of mem-
               ory, your routine cannot suffer memory restrictions. Naturally, this will
               only work when you know how much resource you need up front, but
               you often do.
               Define the program or routine’s expected behavior under abnormal
               circumstances. This determines how robust the code needs to be and
               therefore how thorough your error handling should be. Can a function
               silently generate bad output, subscribing to the historic GIGO principle?5



       5
           That is, Garbage In, Garbage Out—feed it trash, and it will happily spit out trash.

                                                                                           T o Er r I s Hu ma n   105
                                      From Code Craft
                    No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                            Clearly define which components are responsible for handling which
                            errors. Make it explicit in the module’s interface. Ensure that your client
                            knows what will always work and what may one day fail.
                            Check your programming practice: When do you write error-handling
                            code? Don’t put it off until later; you’ll forget to handle something. Don’t
                            wait until your development testing highlights problems before writing
                            handlers—that’s not an engineering approach.

KEY CONCEPT            Write all error detection and handling now, as you write the code that may fail. Don’t
                       put it off until later. If you must be evil and defer handling, at least write the detection
                       scaffolding now.
                            When trapping an error, have you found a symptom or a cause? Consider
                            whether you’ve discovered the source of a problem that needs to be rec-
                            tified here or if you’ve discovered a symptom of an earlier problem. If it’s
                            the latter, then don’t write reams of handling code here, put that in a more
                            appropriate (earlier) error handler.

      In a Nutshell
                                        To err is human; to repent, divine; to persist, devilish.
                                                       —Benjamin Franklin
                       To err is human (but computers seem quite good at it, too). To handle these
                       errors is divine.
                            Every line of code you write must be balanced by appropriate and
                       thorough error checking and handling. A program without rigorous error
                       handling will not be stable. One day an obscure error may occur, and the
                       program will fall over as a result.
                            Handling errors and failure cases is hard work. It bogs programming
                       down in the mundane details of the Real World. However, it’s absolutely
                       essential. As much as 90 percent of the code you write handles exceptional
                       circumstances. (Bentley 82) That’s a surprising statistic, so write code expecting
                       to put far more effort into the things that can go wrong than the things that
                       will go right.

                       Good programmers . . .                     Bad programmers . . .
                            Combine their good                         Take a haphazard approach to
                            intentions with good                       writing code, with neither thought
                            coding practices                           to nor review of what they’re doing
                            Write the error-handling code              Ignore the errors that arise as they
                            as they write the main code                write code
                            Are thorough in the code they              End up conducting lengthy
                            write, covering every error                debugging sessions to track down
                            possibility                                program crashes, because they
                                                                       never considered error conditions in
                                                                       the first place


106    C h ap te r 6
                                                   From Code Craft
                                 No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
See Also
           Chapter 1: On the Defensive
              Handing errors in context is one of the many defensive programming
              techniques.
           Chapter 4: The Write Stuff
              Self-documenting code ensures that error handling is integral to the
              code narrative.
           Chapter 9: Finding Fault
              Unhandled error conditions will manifest as bugs in the code. Here’s
              how to squash them. (It’s best to avoid them in the first place, though.)




Get Thinking
           A detailed discussion of these questions can be found in the “Answers and
           Discussion” section on page 487.

           Mull It Over
           1.   Are return values and exceptions equivalent error reporting mechanisms?
                Prove it.
           2.   What different implementations of tuple return types can you think of?
                Don’t limit yourself to a single programming language. What are the
                pros and cons of using tuples as a return value?
           3.   How do exception implementations differ between languages?
           4.   Signals are an old-school Unix mechanism. Are they still needed now
                that we have modern techniques like exceptions?
           5.   What is the best code structure for error handling?
           6.   How should you handle errors that occur in your error-handling code?



                                                                          T o Er r I s Hu ma n   107
                                      From Code Craft
                    No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
                      Getting Personal
                      1.   How thorough is the error handling in your current codebase? How does
                           this contribute to the stability of the program?
                      2.   Do you naturally consider error handling as you write code, or do you
                           find it a distraction, preferring to come back to it later?
                      3.   Go to the last (reasonably sized) function you wrote or worked on, and
                           perform a careful review of the code. Find every abnormal occurence
                           and potential error situation. How many of these were actually handled
                           in your code?
                               Now get someone else to review it. Don’t be shy! Did they find any
                           more? Why? What does this tell you about the code you’re working on?
                      4.   Do you find it easier to manage and reason about error conditions using
                           return values or exceptions? Are you sure you know what is involved in writ-
                           ing exception-safe code?




108   C h ap te r 6
                                                 From Code Craft
                               No Starch Press, Copyright © 2006 by Pete Goodliffe
