                    SOME PRELIMINARIES FOR
                                           1
                     B E G I N N E RS A N D P R O S



                       Some people, especially professionals, may
                      be tempted to skip this chapter. We sug-
                     gest, though, that everyone at least skim through
                 it. Many professionals will ﬁnd some material
         that is new to them, and in any case it is important that
         all readers be familiar with the material presented here,
         which will be used throughout the remainder of the
         book. Beginners should of course read this chapter
         carefully.
             In the ﬁrst few sections of this chapter, we will present an overview of
         the debugging process and the role of debugging tools, and then walk through
         an extended example in Section 1.7.


1.1   Debugging Tools Used in This Book
         In this book we set out the basic principles of debugging, illustrating them in
         the contexts of the following debugging tools:

                   The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                  (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                   GDB
                     The most commonly used debugging tool among Unix programmers
                     is GDB, the GNU Project Debugger developed by Richard Stallman, a
                     prominent leader of the open source software movement, which played
                     a key role in the development of Linux.
                         Most Linux sytems should have GDB preinstalled. If it is not, you
                     must download the GCC compiler package.
                   DDD
                     Due to the more recent popularity of graphical user interfaces (GUIs),
                     a number of GUI-based debuggers have been developed that run un-
                     der Unix. Most of these are GUI front ends to GDB: The user issues com-
                     mands via the GUI, which in turn passes them on to GDB. One of these
                     is DDD, the Data Display Debugger.
                         If your system does not already have DDD installed, you can down-
                     load it. For instance, on Fedora Linux systems, the command

                       yum install ddd

                       will take care of the entire process for you. In Ubuntu Linux, a similar
                       command, apt-get, can be used.
                   Eclipse
                       Some readers may use integrated development environments (IDEs).
                       An IDE is more than just a debugging tool; it integrates an editor, build
                       tool, debugger, and other development aids into one package. In this
                       book, our example IDE is the highly popular Eclipse system. As with
                       DDD, Eclipse works on top of GDB or some other debugger.
                           You can install Eclipse via yum or apt-get as above, or simply down-
                       load the .zip ﬁle and unpack it in a suitable directory, say /usr/local.
                           In this book, we use Eclipse version 3.3.


    1.2         Programming Language Focus
                   Our primary view in this book is toward C/C++ programming, and most of
                   our examples will be in that context. However, in Chapter 8 we will discuss
                   other languages.


    1.3         The Principles of Debugging
                   Even though debugging is an art rather than a science, there are deﬁnite
                   principles that guide its practice. We will discuss some of them in this section.
                       At least one of our rules, the Fundamental Principle of Conﬁrmation, is
                   rather formal in nature.


                   1.3.1 The Essence of Debugging: The Principle of Conﬁrmation
                   The following rule is the essence of debugging:

                             The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                            (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
2   Chapter 1
The Fundamental Principle of Conﬁrmation
   Fixing a buggy program is a process of conﬁrming, one by one, that the
   many things you believe to be true about the code actually are true. When
   you ﬁnd that one of your assumptions is not true, you have found a clue
   to the location (if not the exact nature) of a bug.
Another way of saying this is:
    Surprises are good!
    When one of the things that you think is true about the program fails to
conﬁrm, you are surprised. But it’s a good surprise, because this discovery
can lead you to the location of a bug.


1.3.2 Of What Value Is a Debugging Tool for the Principle of Conﬁrmation?
The classic debugging technique is to simply add trace code to the program
to print out values of variables as the program executes, using printf() or
cout statements, for example. You might ask, “Isn’t this enough? Why use a
debugging tool like GDB, DDD, or Eclipse?”
     First of all, this approach requires a constant cycle of strategically adding
trace code, recompiling the program, running the program and analyzing
the output of the trace code, removing the trace code after the bug is ﬁxed,
and repeating these steps for each new bug that is discovered. This is highly
time consuming and fatigue making. Most importantly, these actions distract
you from the real task and reduce your ability to focus on the reasoning pro-
cess necessary to ﬁnd the bug.
     In contrast, with graphical debugging tools like DDD and Eclipse, all
you have to do in order to examine the value of a variable is move the mouse
pointer over an instance of that variable in the code display, and you are
shown its current value. Why make yourself even wearier than necessary,
for longer than necessary, during an all-night debugging session by doing
this using printf() statements? Do yourself a favor and reduce the amount
of time you have to spend and the tedium you need to endure by using a
debugging tool.
     You also get a lot more from a debugging tool than the ability to look
at variables. In many situations, a debugger can tell you the approximate lo-
cation of a bug. Suppose, for example, that your program bombs or crashes
with a segmentation fault, that is, a memory access error. As you will see in our
sample debugging session later in this chapter, GDB/DDD/Eclipse can im-
mediately tell you the location of the seg fault, which is typically at or near
the location of the bug.
     Similarly, a debugger lets you set watchpoints that can tell you at what
point during a run of the program the value of a certain variable reaches a
suspect value or range. This information can be difﬁcult to deduce by look-
ing at the output of calls to printf().



          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                   Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   3
                1.3.3 Other Debugging Principles
                Start small
                    At the beginning of the debugging process, you should run your pro-
                    gram on easy, simple cases. This may not expose all of your bugs, but it
                    is likely to uncover a few of them. If, for example, your code consists of
                    a large loop, the easiest bugs to ﬁnd are those that arise on the ﬁrst or
                    second iteration.
                Use a top-down approach
                    You probably know about using a top-down or modular approach to writ-
                    ing code: Your main program should not be too long, and it should con-
                    sist mostly of calls to functions that do substantial work. If one of those
                    functions is lengthy, you should consider breaking it up, in turn, into
                    smaller modules.
                         Not only should you write code in a top-down manner, you should
                    also debug code from the top down.
                         For example, suppose your program uses a function f(). When you
                   step through the code using a debugging tool and encounter a call to
                   f(), the debugger will give you a choice as to where the next pause in ex-
                   ecution will occur—either at the ﬁrst line within the function about to
                   be called or at the statement following the function call. In many cases,
                   the latter is the better initial choice: You perform the call and then in-
                   spect the values of variables that depend on the results of the call in or-
                   der to see whether or not the function worked correctly. If so, then you
                   will have avoided the time-consuming and needless effort of stepping
                   through the code inside the function, which was not misbehaving (in
                   this case).
                Use a debugging tool to determine the location of a segmentation fault
                   The very ﬁrst step you take when a seg fault occurs should be to run
                   your program within the debugger and reproduce the seg fault. The
                   debugger will tell you the line of code at which the fault occurred. You
                   can then get additional useful information by invoking the debugger’s
                   backtrace facility, which displays the sequence of function calls leading to
                   the invocation of the function in which the fault occurred.
                        In some cases it may be difﬁcult to reproduce the seg fault, but if
                   you have a core ﬁle, you can still do a backtrace to determine the situa-
                   tion that produced the seg fault. This will be discussed in Chapter 4.
                Determine the location of an inﬁnite loop by issuing an interrupt
                    If you suspect your program has an inﬁnite loop, enter the debugger
                    and run your program again, letting it execute long enough to enter the
                    loop. Then use the debugger’s interrupt command to suspend the pro-
                    gram, and do a backtrace to see what point of the loop body has been
                    reached and how the program got there. (The program has not been
                    killed; you can resume execution if you wish.)
                Use binary search
                   You’ve probably seen binary search in the context of sorted lists. Say, for
                   example, that you have an array x[] of 500 numbers, arranged in ascend-
                          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
4   Chapter 1
             ing order, and you wish to determine where to insert a new number, y.
             Start by comparing y to x[250]. If y turns out to be smaller than that ele-
             ment, you’d next compare it to x[125], but if y is larger than x[250], then
             the next comparison would instead be with x[375]. In the latter case, if
             y is smaller than x[375], you then compare it to x[312], which is halfway
             between x[250] and x[375], and so on. You’d keep cutting your search
             space in half at each iteration, and so ﬁnd the insertion point quickly.
                   This principle can be applied while debugging too. Suppose you
             know that the value stored in a certain variable goes bad sometime dur-
             ing the ﬁrst 1,000 iterations of a loop. One way that might help you
             track down the iteration where the value ﬁrst goes bad is to use a watch-
             point, an advanced technique that we will discuss in Section 1.5.3. An-
             other approach is to use binary search, in this case in time rather than
             in space. You’d ﬁrst check the variable’s value at the 500th iteration; if
             it is still all right at that point, you’d next check the value at the 750th
             iteration, and so on.
                   As another example, suppose one of the source ﬁles in your pro-
             gram will not even compile. The line of code cited in the compiler mes-
             sage generated by a syntax error is sometimes far from the actual loca-
             tion of the error, and so you may have trouble determining that loca-
             tion. Binary search can help here: You remove (or comment out) one
             half of the code in the compilation unit, recompile the remaining code,
             and see if the error message persists. If it does, then the error is in that
             second half; if the message does not appear, then the error is in the half
             that you deleted. Once you determine which half of the code contains
             the bug, you further conﬁne the bug to half of that portion, and keep
             going until you locate the problem. Of course, you should make a copy
             of the original code before starting this process or, better yet, use your
             text editor’s undo feature. See Chapter 7 for tips on making good use of
             an editor while programming.



1.4   Text-Based vs. GUI-Based Debugging Tools, and a Com-
         promise Between Them
         The GUIs discussed in this book, DDD and Eclipse, serve as front ends to
         GDB for C and C++ and to other debuggers. While the GUIs have eye appeal
         and can be more convenient than the text-based GDB, our point of view in
         this book will be that text-based and GUI-based debuggers (including IDEs)
         are all useful, in different contexts.


         1.4.1 Brief Comparison of Interfaces
         To quickly get an idea of the differences between text-based and GUI debug-
         ging tools, let’s consider a situation that we will use as a running example in
         this chapter. The program in the example is insert_sort. It is compiled from a
         source ﬁle ins.c, and it performs an insertion sort.
                   The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                  (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                            Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   5
                1.4.1.1 GDB: Plain Text
                To initiate a debugging session on this program with GDB, you would type

                $ gdb insert_sort


                at the Unix command line, after which GDB would invite you to submit com-
                mands by displaying its prompt:

                (gdb)


                1.4.1.2 DDD: a GUI Debugging Tool
                Using DDD, you would begin your debugging session by typing

                $ ddd insert_sort


                at the Unix command line. The DDD window would come up, after which
                you would submit commands through the GUI.
                     The typical appearance of a DDD window is shown in Figure 1-1. As you
                see, the DDD window lays out information in various subwindows:
                •   The Source Text window displays your source code. DDD begins its dis-
                    play at your main() function, but you can of course move to other parts of
                    the source ﬁle by using the scroll bar at the right edge of the window.
                •   The Menu Bar presents various menu categories, including File, Edit,
                    and View.
                •   The Command Tool lists the most common DDD commands (such as
                    Run, Interrupt, Step, and Next), so that you can access them quickly.
                •   The Console: Recall that DDD is simply a GUI front end to GDB (and
                    to other debuggers). DDD translates selections made with the mouse to
                    the corresponding GDB commands. These commands and their output
                    are displayed in the Console. In addition, you can submit commands to
                    GDB directly via the Console, which is a handy feature because not all
                    GDB commands have DDD counterparts.
                •   The Data window shows the values of variables that you have requested
                    to be continuously displayed. This subwindow will not appear until you
                    have made such a request, so it does not appear in this ﬁgure.
                     Here is a quick example of how a typical debugging command is sub-
                mitted to the debugger under each type of user interface. When debugging
                insert_sort, you may wish to pause execution of the program—to set a break-
                point—at line 16 (say) of the function get_args(). (You will see the full source
                code for insert_sort in Section 1.7.) To arrange this in GDB, you would type

                (gdb) break 16


                at the GDB prompt.
                          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
6   Chapter 1
                                                                       Menu Bar




                                                                      Command
                                                                        Tool




                                                                      Source Text
                                                                       Window




                                                                        Console




Figure 1-1: DDD layout



     The full command name is break, but GDB allows abbreviations as long
as there is no ambiguity, and most GDB users would type b 16 here. In order
to facilitate understanding for those new to GDB, we will use full command
names at ﬁrst, and switch to abbreviations later in the book, after the com-
mands have become more familiar.
     Using DDD, you would look at the Source Text window, click at the
beginning of line 16, and then click the Break icon at the top of the DDD
screen. You could also right-click at the beginning of the line, and then se-
lect Set Breakpoint. Yet another option is to simply double-click the line of
code, anywhere to the left of the start of the line. In any case, DDD would
conﬁrm the selection by displaying a little stop sign at that line, as shown in
Figure 1-2. In this way you can see your breakpoints at a glance.

1.4.1.3 Eclipse: A GUI Debugger and Much More
Now, Figure 1-3 introduces the general environment in Eclipse. In Eclipse
terminology, we are currently in the Debug perspective. Eclipse is a general
framework for development of lots of different kinds of software. Each pro-
gramming language has its own plug-in GUI—a perspective—within Eclipse.
Indeed, there could be several competing perspectives for the same lan-
guage. In our Eclipse work in this book, we will use the C/C++ perspective
for C/C++ development, the Pydev perspective for writing Python programs,
and so on. There is also a Debug perspective for the actual debugging (with
some language-speciﬁc features), and that is what you see in the ﬁgure.

          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                   Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   7
                Figure 1-2: Breakpoint set




                Figure 1-3: Eclipse environment

                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
8   Chapter 1
     The C/C++ perspective is part of the CDT plugin. Behind the scenes
CDT invokes GDB, similar to the case of DDD.
     The details of that ﬁgure are generally similar to what we described for
DDD above. A perspective is broken into tabbed windows called views. You
can see a view for the source ﬁle, ins.c, on the left; there is the Variables view
for inspecting the values of the variables (none so far in the picture); there is
a Console view, whose function is quite similar to the subwindow in DDD of
the same name; and so on.
     You can set breakpoints and so on visually as in DDD. In Figure 1-4, for
example, the line

for (i = 0; i < num_inputs; i++)


in the source ﬁle window has a blue symbol in the left margin, symbolizing
that there is a breakpoint there.




Figure 1-4: Removing a breakpoint in Eclipse




1.4.1.4 Eclipse vs. DDD
Eclipse also has some aids missing from DDD. Near the right side, for in-
stance, note the Outline view, which lists the variables, functions and so on.
If you click the entry for your function scoot_over(), for example, the cursor
in the source ﬁle view will move to that function. Moreover, if you temporar-
ily move from the Debug perspective back to the C/C++ perspective, where
           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                    Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   9
                 you are doing your editing and compiling for this project (not shown), the
                 Outline view is at your disposal there too. This can be quite helpful in large
                 projects.
                      Eclipse also better integrates the editing and compiling processes. If you
                 have compilation errors, they are clearly marked within the editor. This can
                 be done with the Vim editor, which both authors of this book tend to prefer
                 over an IDE, but an IDE does it much better.
                      On the other hand, you can see that Eclipse, as with most IDEs, does
                 have a major footprint on your screen (and indeed, on the pages of this
                 book!). That Outline view is occupying precious space on the screen whether
                 you use it much or not. Granted, you can hide the Outline by clicking the X
                 in its right-hand corner (and if you want to get it back, select Window | Show
                 Views | Outline), which reclaims some space, and you can also drag tabs to
                 different locations within the Eclipse window. But in general, it may be difﬁ-
                 cult to make good use of screen space in Eclipse.
                      Remember that you can always execute GDB commands directly in DDD’s
                 Console. You thus have the ﬂexibility to perform debugging commands in
                 the most convenient way available, which is sometimes through the DDD in-
                 terface and sometimes through the GDB command line. At various points in
                 this book, you will see that there are a number of actions you can take with
                 GDB that can make your debugging life much more convenient.
                      By contrast, GDB is mostly transparent to Eclipse users, and while the
                 old saying “Ignorance is bliss” may often apply, the transparency means you
                 lose easy access to the labor-saving actions made possible by direct usage of
                 GDB. As of this writing, a determined user can still directly access GDB by
                 clicking the GDB thread in Debug and then using the Console, though mi-
                 nus the GDB prompts. However, this “undocumented feature” may not sur-
                 vive in future versions.

                 1.4.1.5 Advantages of the GUIs
                 The GUI interfaces provided by DDD and Eclipse are more visually appeal-
                 ing than that of GDB. They also tend to be more convenient. For instance,
                 suppose that you no longer want execution to pause at line 16 of get_args(),
                 that is, you wish to clear the breakpoint. In GDB you would clear the break-
                 point by typing

                 (gdb) clear 16


                      However, in order to do this, you need to remember the line number
                 of the breakpoint—not an easy task if you have many breakpoints active
                 at once. You could refresh your memory by using GDB’s info break com-
                 mand to get a list of all the breakpoints, but it would still be a bit of work
                 and would distract from the focus on ﬁnding the bug.
                      In DDD your task would be far simpler: To clear a breakpoint, simply
                 click the stop sign at the desired line, then click Clear, and the stop sign
                 would disappear, showing that the breakpoint has been cleared.

                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
10   Chapter 1
      In Eclipse, you would go to the Breakpoints view, highlight the break-
point(s) you want to remove, and then move the mouse cursor to the gray
X, which symbolizes the Remove Selected Breakpoints operation (see Fig-
ure 1-4). Alternatively, you can right-click the blue breakpoint symbol in the
source code window and select Toggle Breakpoint.
      One task for which the GUIs are clear winners is stepping through code.
It is much easier and more pleasant to do this using DDD or Eclipse rather
than GDB, because you can watch your movement through the code in the
GUI’s source code window. The next line in your source code to be exe-
cuted is indicated by an arrow, as shown for DDD in Figure 1-5. In Eclipse,
your next line is highlighted in green. You can thus tell at a glance where
you are relative to other program statements of interest.

1.4.1.6 Advantages of GDB
So, the GUIs have many advantages over the text-based GDB. Yet a sweeping
conclusion based on this example that the GUIs are better than GDB would
be unjustiﬁed.
     Younger programmers who have grown up using GUIs for everything
they do online naturally prefer GUIs to GDB, as do many of their older col-
leagues. On the other hand, GDB has some deﬁnite advantages, too:
•   GDB starts up more quickly than DDD, a big advantage when you just
    need to quickly check something in your code. The difference in startup
    times is even greater in the case of Eclipse.
•   In some cases, debugging is performed remotely via an SSH (or a tel-
    net) connection, say from a public terminal. If you lack an X11 setup,
    the GUIs cannot be used at all, and even with X11, the screen refresh
    operations of the GUIs may be slow.
•   When debugging several programs that work in cooperation with each
    other—for example, a client/server pair in a networked environment—
    you need a separate debugging window for each program. It is a little
    better in Eclipse than in DDD, as Eclipse will allow you to debug two
    programs simultaneously in the same window, but this does compound
    the space problems cited earlier. Thus the small visual footprint that
    GDB occupies on the screen compared to the GUI’s larger footprint is a
    big advantage.
•   If the program you are debugging has a GUI, and you use a GUI-based
    debugger such as DDD, they can clash. The GUI events—keystrokes,
    mouse clicks, and mouse movements—of one can interfere with those
    of the other, and the program may behave differently when run under
    the debugger than it does when run independently. This can seriously
    complicate ﬁnding bugs.
    For those unaccustomed to the amount of typing required by GDB com-
pared to the convenient mouse operations of the GUIs, it must be noted
that GDB includes some typing-saving devices that make its text-based nature
more acceptable. We mentioned earlier that most of GDB’s commands have
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   11
                 short abbreviations, and most people use these instead of the full forms.
                 Also, the CTRL-P and CTRL-N key combinations allow you to scroll through
                 previous commands and edit them if you wish. Simply hitting the ENTER key
                 repeats the last command issued (which is very useful when repeatedly per-
                 forming the next command to step through code one line at a time), and
                 there is a define command that allows the user to deﬁne abbreviations and
                 macros. Details of these features will be presented in Chapters 2 and 3.

                 1.4.1.7 The Bottom Line: Each Has Its Value
                 We consider both GDB and the GUIs to be important tools, and this book
                 will present examples of GDB, DDD, and Eclipse. We will always begin treat-
                 ment of any particular topic with GDB, as it is the commonality among these
                 tools, then show how the material extends to the GUIs.


                 1.4.2 Compromises
                 Since version 6.1, GDB has offered a compromise between text-based and
                 graphical user interaction in the form of a mode named TUI (Terminal
                 User Interface). In this mode, GDB splits the terminal screen into analogs
                 of DDD’s Source Text window and Console; you can follow the progress of
                 your program’s execution in the former while issuing GDB commands in
                 the latter. Alternatively, you can use another program, CGDB, which offers
                 similar functionality.

                 1.4.2.1 GDB in TUI Mode
                 To run GDB in TUI mode, you can either specify the option -tui on the
                 command line when invoking GDB or type CTRL-X-A from within GDB while
                 in non-TUI mode. The latter command also toggles you out of TUI mode if
                 you are currently in it.
                     In TUI mode, the GDB window is divided into two subwindows—one for
                 GDB commands and one for viewing source code. Suppose you start GDB
                 in TUI mode on insert_sort and then execute a couple of debugging com-
                 mands. Your GDB screen may then look like this:

                    11
                    12      void get_args(int ac, char **av)
                    13      { int i;
                    14
                    15          num_inputs = ac - 1;
                 * 16           for (i = 0; i < num_inputs; i++)
                  > 17             x[i] = atoi(av[i+1]);
                    18      }
                    19
                    20      void scoot_over(int jj)
                    21      { int k;
                    22
                    23              for (k = num_y-1; k > jj; k++)                            .
                          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
12   Chapter 1
 File: ins.c     Procedure: get_args   Line: 17      pc: 0x80484b8
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
(gdb) break 16
Breakpoint 1 at 0x804849f: file ins.c, line 16.
(gdb) run 12 5 6
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5 6

Breakpoint 1, get_args (ac=4, av=0xbffff094) at ins.c:16
(gdb) next
(gdb)


    The lower subwindow shows exactly what you would see if you were us-
ing GDB without TUI. Here, this subwindow shows the following things:

•   We issued a break command to set a breakpoint at line 16 in the current
    source ﬁle.
•   We executed run to run the program, passing it the command-line ar-
    guments 12, 5, and 6, after which the debugger stopped execution at
    the speciﬁed breakpoint. (run and the other GDB commands will be
    explained later.) GDB reminds us that the breakpoint is at line 16 of
    ins.c and informs us that the machine code for that source line resides at
    memory address 0x804849f.
•   We issued a next command to step to the next line of code, line 17.
    The upper subwindow offers some extra, visually helpful information.
Here TUI shows us the source code surrounding the line currently being
executed, just as DDD and Eclipse would. This makes it much easier to see
where we are in the code. The breakpoint and the line currently being exe-
cuted are indicated with an asterisk and a > sign, respectively, analogous to
DDD’s stop sign and green arrow icons.
    We can move to other parts of the code by using the up and down arrow
keys to scroll. When not in TUI mode, you can use the arrow keys to scroll
through previous GDB commands, in order to modify or repeat them. In
TUI mode, the arrow keys are for scrolling the source code subwindow, and
you scroll through previous GDB commands by using CTRL-P and CTRL-N.
Also, in TUI mode, the region of code displayed in the source code subwin-
dow can be changed using GDB’s list command. This is especially useful
when working with multiple source ﬁles.
    By making use of GDB’s TUI mode and its typing shortcuts, we can at-
tain a lot of the GUIs’ extra functionality without incurring the GUIs’ disad-
vantages. Note, however, that in some circumstances TUI may not behave
quite as you want it to, in which case you will need to ﬁnd a workaround.

1.4.2.2 CGDB
Another interface to GDB that you may wish to consider is CGDB, available
at http://cgdb.sourceforge.net/ . CGDB also offers a compromise between a text-
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   13
                  based and a GUI approach. Like the GUIs, it serves as a front end to GDB.
                  It’s similar to the terminal-based TUI concept, but with the additional en-
                  ticements that it is in color and you can browse through the source code sub-
                  window and set breakpoints directly there. It also seems to handle screen
                  refresh better than GDB/TUI does.
                        Here are a few of CGDB’s basic commands and conventions:
                  •   Hit ESC to go from the command window to the source code window; hit
                      i to get back.
                  •   While in the source window, move around by using the arrow keys or
                      vi-like keys (j for down, k for up, / to search).
                  •   The next line to be executed is marked by an arrow.
                  •   To set a breakpoint at the line currently highlighted by the cursor, just
                      hit the spacebar.
                  •   Breakpoint lines have their line numbers highlighted in red.



     1.5     Main Debugger Operations
                  Here we give an overview of the main types of operations that a debugger
                  offers.


                  1.5.1 Stepping Through the Source Code
                  You saw earlier that to run a program in GDB, you use the run command,
                  and that in DDD you click Run. In details to be presented later, you will see
                  that Eclipse handles things similarly.
                       You can also arrange for execution of the program to pause at certain
                  points, so that you can inspect the values of variables in order to get clues
                  about where your bug is. Here are some of the methods you can use to do
                  this:
                  Breakpoints
                      As mentioned earlier, a debugging tool will pause execution of your pro-
                      gram at speciﬁed breakpoints. This is done in GDB via the break com-
                      mand, together with the line number; in DDD you right-click anywhere
                      in white space in the relevant line and choose Set Breakpoint; in Eclipse
                      you double-click in the margin to the left of the line.
                  Single-stepping
                      GDB’s next command, which was also mentioned earlier, tells GDB to
                      execute the next line and then pause. The step command is similar, ex-
                      cept that at function calls it will enter the function, whereas next will re-
                      sult in the next pause in execution occurring at the line following the
                      function call. DDD has corresponding Next and Step menu choices,
                      while Eclipse has Step Over and Step Into icons to do the same thing.


                            The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                           (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
14    Chapter 1
Resume operation
   In GDB, the continue command tells the debugger to resume execution
   and continue until a breakpoint is hit. There is a corresponding menu
   item in DDD, and Eclipse has a Resume icon for it.
Temporary breakpoints
   In GDB the tbreak command is similar to break, but it sets a breakpoint
   that only stays in effect until the ﬁrst time the speciﬁed line is reached.
   In DDD this is accomplished by right-clicking anywhere in the white
   space in the desired line in the Source Text window, and then select-
   ing Set Temporary Breakpoint. In Eclipse, highlight the desired line in
   the source window, then right-click and select Run to Line.
       GDB also has until and finish commands, which create special kinds
   of one-time breakpoints. DDD has corresponding Until and Finish menu
   items in its Command window, and Eclipse has Step Return. These are
   discussed in Chapter 2.
    A typical debugging pattern for program execution is as follows (us-
ing GDB as an example): After you hit a breakpoint, you move through the
code one line at a time or single-step for a while, via GDB’s next and step com-
mands. This allows you to carefully examine the program’s state and behav-
ior near the breakpoint. When you are done with this, you can tell the de-
bugger to continue to execute the program without pausing until the next
breakpoint is reached, by using the continue command.


1.5.2 Inspecting Variables
After the debugger pauses execution of our program, you can issue com-
mands to display the values of program variables. These could be local vari-
ables, globals, elements of arrays and C structs, member variables in C++
classes, and so on. If a variable is found to have an unexpected value, that
typically is a big clue to the location and nature of a bug. DDD can even
graph arrays, which may reveal, at a glance, suspicious values or trends oc-
curring within an array.
     The most basic type of variable display is simply printing the current
value. For example, suppose you have set a breakpoint at line 37 of the func-
tion insert() in ins.c. (Again, the full source code is given in Section 1.7, but
the details needn’t concern you for now.) When you reach that line, you can
check the value of the local variable j in that function. In GDB you would
use the print command:

(gdb) print j


     In DDD it is even easier: You simply move the mouse pointer over any
instance of j in the Source Text window, and then the value of j will be dis-
played, for a second or two, in a little yellow box—called a value tip—near
the mouse pointer. See Figure 1-5, where the value of the variable new_y
is being examined. Things work the same way with Eclipse, as seen in Fig-
ure 1-6, where we are querying the value of num_y.
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   15
                 Figure 1-5: Inspecting a variable in DDD




                 Figure 1-6: Inspecting a variable in Eclipse

                            The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                           (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
16   Chapter 1
     As you will see in Chapter 2, in GDB or DDD you can also arrange to
continuously display a variable so that you don’t have to repeatedly ask to
see the value. DDD has an especially nice feature for displaying linked lists,
trees, and other data structures containing pointers: You can click an outgo-
ing link of any node in such a structure to ﬁnd the next node.


1.5.3 Issuing an “All Points Bulletin” for Changes to a Variable
A watchpoint combines the notions of breakpoint and variable inspection.
The most basic form instructs the debugger to pause execution of the pro-
gram whenever the value of a speciﬁed variable changes.
    For example, suppose that you wish to examine a program’s state dur-
ing the points in the course of its execution at which the variable z changes
value. In GDB, you can issue the command

(gdb) watch z


     When you run the program, GDB will pause execution whenever the
value of z changes. In DDD, you would set the watchpoint by clicking any
instance of z in the Source Text window and then clicking the Watch icon at
the top of the DDD window.
     Even better, you can set watchpoints based on conditional expressions.
Say, for example, that you wish to ﬁnd the ﬁrst point in the execution of the
program at which the value of z exceeds 28. You can accomplish this by set-
ting a watchpoint based on the expression (z > 28). In GDB, you would type

(gdb) watch (z > 28)


     In DDD, you would issue this command in DDD’s Console. Recall that
in C the expression (z > 28) is of Boolean type and evaluates to either true or
false, where false is represented by 0 and true is represented by any nonzero
integer, usually 1. When z ﬁrst takes on a value larger than 28, the value of
the expression (z > 28) will change from 0 to 1, and GDB will pause execu-
tion of the program.
     You can set a watchpoint in Eclipse by right-clicking in the source win-
dow, selecting Add a Watch Expression, and then ﬁlling in the desired ex-
pression in the dialog.
     Watchpoints are usually not as useful for local variables as they are for
variables with wider scope, because a watchpoint set on a local variable is
canceled as soon as the variable goes out of scope, that is, when the func-
tion in which the variable is deﬁned terminates. However, local variables in
main() are an obvious exception, as such variables are not deallocated until
the program ﬁnishes execution.


1.5.4 Moving Up and Down the Call Stack
During a function call, runtime information associated with the call is stored
in a region of memory known as a stack frame. The frame contains the values
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   17
                 of the function’s local variables and its parameters and a record of the loca-
                 tion from which the function was called. Each time a function call occurs,
                 a new frame is created and pushed onto a stack maintained by the system;
                 the frame at the top of the stack represents the currently executing function,
                 and it is popped off the stack and deallocated when the function exits.
                      For example, suppose that you pause execution of your sample pro-
                 gram, insert_sort, while in the insert() function. The data in the current
                 stack frame will state that you got there via a function call at a speciﬁc lo-
                 cation that turns out to be within the process_data() function (which invokes
                 insert()). The frame will also store the current value of insert()’s only local
                 variable, which you will see later is j.
                      The stack frames for the other active function invocations will contain
                 similar information, and you can also examine these if you wish. For in-
                 stance, even though execution currently resides in insert(), you may wish to
                 take a look at the previous frame in the call stack, that is, at process_data()’s
                 frame. You can do so in GDB with the command

                 (gdb) frame 1


                      When issuing GDB’s frame command, the frame of the currently execut-
                 ing function is numbered 0, its parent frame (that is, the stack frame of the
                 function’s caller) is numbered 1, the parent’s parent is numbered 2, and so
                 on. GDB’s up command takes you to the next parent in the call stack (for ex-
                 ample, to frame 1 from frame 0), and down takes you in the other direction.
                 Such operations are very useful, because the values of the local variables in
                 some of the earlier stack frames may give you a clue as to what caused a bug.
                      Traversing the call stack does not change the execution path—in this
                 example, the next line of insert_sort to be executed will still be the current
                 one in insert()—but it does allow you to take a look at the ancestor frames
                 and so examine the values of the local variables for the function invocations
                 leading up to the current one. Again, this may give you hints about where to
                 ﬁnd a bug.
                      GDB’s backtrace command will show you the entire stack, that is, the en-
                 tire collection of frames currently in existence.
                      The analogous operation in DDD is invoked by clicking Status | Back-
                 trace; a window will pop up showing all the frames, and you can then click
                 whichever one you wish to inspect. The DDD interface also has Up and
                 Down buttons that can be clicked to invoke GDB’s up and down commands.
                      In Eclipse, the stack is continuously visible in the Debug perspective it-
                 self. In Figure 1-7, look at the Debug tab in the upper-left corner. You’ll see
                 that we are currently in frame 2, in the function get_args(), which we called
                 from frame 1 in main(). Whichever frame is highlighted is the one displayed
                 in the source window, so you can display any frame by clicking it in the call
                 stack.




                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
18   Chapter 1
         Figure 1-7: Moving within the stack in Eclipse



1.6   Online Help
         In GDB, documentation can be accessed through the help command. For
         example,

         (gdb) help breakpoints


         will give you the documentation on breakpoints. The GDB command help,
         with no arguments, gives you a menu of command categories that can be
         used as arguments for help.
              In DDD and Eclipse, a wealth of material is available by clicking Help.


1.7   Introductory Debugging Session
         Now we will present a complete debugging session. As mentioned, the sam-
         ple program is in the source ﬁle ins.c and does an insertion sort. This is not
         an efﬁcient sorting method, of course, but the simplicity of the code makes
         it good for illustrating the debugging operations. Here is the code:

         //
         // insertion sort, several errors
         //
         // usage: insert_sort num1 num2 num3 ..., where the numi are the numbers to
         // be sorted
                    The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                   (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                            Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   19
                 int x[10], // input array
                     y[10], // workspace array
                     num_inputs, // length of input array
                     num_y = 0; // current number of elements in y

                 void get_args(int ac, char **av)
                 { int i;

                     num_inputs = ac - 1;
                     for (i = 0; i < num_inputs; i++)
                        x[i] = atoi(av[i+1]);
                 }

                 void scoot_over(int jj)
                 { int k;

                     for (k = num_y-1; k > jj; k++)
                        y[k] = y[k-1];
                 }

                 void insert(int new_y)
                 { int j;

                     if (num_y = 0) { // y empty so far, easy case
                        y[0] = new_y;
                        return;
                     }
                     // need to insert just before the first y
                     // element that new_y is less than
                     for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
                        if (new_y < y[j]) {
                           // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward
                           // before inserting new_y
                           scoot_over(j);
                           y[j] = new_y;
                           return;
                        }
                     }
                 }

                 void process_data()
                 {
                    for (num_y = 0; num_y < num_inputs; num_y++)
                       // insert new y in the proper place
                       // among y[0],...,y[num_y-1]
                       insert(x[num_y]);

                            The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                           (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
20   Chapter 1
}

void print_results()
{ int i;

    for (i = 0; i < num_inputs; i++)
       printf("%d\n",y[i]);
}

int main(int argc, char ** argv)
{ get_args(argc,argv);
   process_data();
   print_results();
}

     Below is a pseudocode description of the program. The function calls
are indicated by call statements, and the pseudocode for each function is
shown indented under the calls:

call main():
   set y array to empty
   call get_args():
      get num_inputs numbers x[i] from command line
   call process_data():
      for i = 1 to num_inputs
         call insert(x[i]):
             new_y = x[i]
             find first y[j] for which new_y < y[j]
             call scoot_over(j):
                shift y[j], y[j+1], ... to right,
                   to make room for new_y
         set y[j] = new_y


     Let’s compile and run the code:

$ gcc -g -Wall -o insert_sort ins.c


     Important: You can use the -g option to GCC to tell the compiler to save
the symbol table—that is, the list of memory addresses corresponding to your
program’s variables and lines of code—within the generated executable ﬁle,
which here is insert_sort. This is an absolutely essential step that allows you
to refer to the variable names and line numbers in the source code during a
debugging session. Without this step (and something similar would have to
be done if you were to use a compiler other than GCC), you could not ask
the debugger to “stop at line 30” or “print the value of x,” for example.
     Now let’s run the program. Following the Start Small Principle from
Section 1.3.3, ﬁrst try sorting a list of just two numbers:
           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                   Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   21
                 $ insert_sort 12 5
                 (execution halted by user hitting ctrl-C)


                      The program did not terminate or print any output. It apparently went
                 into an inﬁnite loop, and we had to kill it by hitting CTRL-C. There is no
                 doubt about it: Something is wrong.
                      In the following sections, we will ﬁrst present a debugging session for
                 this buggy program using GDB, and then discuss how the same operations
                 are done using DDD and Eclipse.


                 1.7.1 The GDB Approach
                 To track down the ﬁrst bug, execute the program in GDB and let it run for
                 a while before suspending it with CTRL-C. Then see where you are. In this
                 manner, you can determine the location of the inﬁnite loop.
                     First, start the GDB debugger on insert_sort:

                 $ gdb insert_sort -tui


                     Your screen will now look like this:

                     63       { get_args(argc,argv);
                     64         process_data();
                     65         print_results();
                     66       }
                     67
                     68
                     69
                  File: ins.c    Procedure: ??    Line: ??      pc: ??
                 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 (gdb)


                      The top subwindow displays part of your source code, and in the bottom
                 subwindow you see the GDB prompt, ready for your commands. There is
                 also a GDB welcome message, which we have omitted for the sake of brevity.
                      If you do not request TUI mode when invoking GDB, you would receive
                 only the welcome message and the GDB prompt, without the upper subwin-
                 dow for your program’s source code. You could then enter TUI mode using
                 the GDB command CTRL-X-A. This command toggles you in and out of TUI
                 mode and is useful if you wish, for example, to temporarily leave TUI mode
                 so that you can read GDB’s online help more conveniently, or so that you
                 can see more of your GDB command history together on one screen.
                      Now run the program from within GDB by issuing the run command to-
                 gether with your program’s command-line arguments, and then hit CTRL-C
                 to suspend it. The screen now looks like this:

                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
22   Chapter 1
    46
    47 void process_data()
    48 {
    49 for (num_y = 0; num_y < num_inputs; num_y++)
    50 // insert new y in the proper place
    51 // among y[0],...,y[num_y-1]
  > 52 insert(x[num_y]);
    53 }
    54
    55 void print_results()
    56 { int i;
    57
    58 for (i = 0; i < num_inputs; i++)
    59 printf("%d\n",y[i]);
    60 } .
 File: ins.c Procedure: process_data Line: 52 pc: 0x8048483
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
(gdb) run 12 5
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

Program received signal SIGINT, Interrupt.
0x08048483 in process_data () at ins.c:52
(gdb)


     This tells you that when you stopped the program, insert_sort was in the
function process_data() and line 52 in the source ﬁle ins.c was about to be
executed.
     We hit CTRL-C at a random time and stopped at a random place in the
code. Sometimes it’s good to suspend and restart a program that has stopped
responding two or three times by issuing continue between CTRL-Cs, in order
to see where you stop each time.
     Now, line 52 is part of the loop that begins on line 49. Is this loop the
inﬁnite one? The loop doesn’t look like it should run indeﬁnitely, but the
Principle of Conﬁrmation says you should verify this, not just assume it. If
the loop is not terminating because somehow you haven’t set the upper
bound for the variable num_y correctly, then after the program has run for a
while the value of num_y will be huge. Is it? (Again, it looks like it shouldn’t
be, but you need to conﬁrm that.) Let’s check what the current value of
num_y is by asking GDB to print it out.

(gdb) print num_y
$1 = 1

     The output of this query to GDB shows that the value of num_y is 1. The
$1 label means that this is the ﬁrst value you’ve asked GDB to print out. (The
values designated by $1, $2, $3, and so on are collectively called the value his-
tory of the debugging session. They can be very useful, as you will see in later
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   23
                 chapters.) So we seem to be on only the second iteration of the loop on
                 line 49. If this loop were the inﬁnite one, it would be way past its second it-
                 eration by now.
                      So let’s take a closer look at what occurs when num_y is 1. Tell GDB to
                 stop in insert() during the second iteration of the loop on line 49 so that
                 you can take a look around and try to ﬁnd out what’s going wrong at that
                 place and time in the program:

                 (gdb) break 30
                 Breakpoint 1 at 0x80483fc: file ins.c, line 30.
                 (gdb) condition 1 num_y==1


                      The ﬁrst command places a breakpoint at line 30, that is, at the begin-
                 ning of insert(). Alternatively, you could have speciﬁed this breakpoint via
                 the command break insert, meaning to break at the ﬁrst line of insert()
                 (which here is line 30). This latter form has an advantage: If you modify
                 the program code so that the function insert() no longer begins at line 30
                 of ins.c, your breakpoint would remain valid if speciﬁed using the function
                 name, but not if speciﬁed using the line number.
                      Ordinarily a break command makes execution pause every time the pro-
                 gram hits the speciﬁed line. However, the second command here, condition
                 1 num_y==1, makes that breakpoint conditional : GDB will pause execution of
                 the program at breakpoint 1 only when the condition num_y==1 holds.
                      Note that unlike the break command, which accepts line numbers (or
                 function names), condition accepts a breakpoint number. You can always use
                 the command info break to look up the number of the desired breakpoint.
                 (That command gives you other useful information too, such as the number
                 of times each breakpoint has been hit so far.)
                      We could have combined the break and condition commands into a sin-
                 gle step by using break if as follows:

                 (gdb) break 30 if num_y==1


                      Then run the program again, using the run command. You do not have
                 to restate the command-line arguments if you just wish to reuse the old ones.
                 This is the case here, and so you can simply type run. Since the program is
                 already running, GDB asks us if you wish to restart from the beginning, and
                 you answer “yes.”
                      The screen will now look like this:

                     24            y[k] = y[k-1];
                     25      }
                     26
                     27      void insert(int new_y)
                     28      { int j;
                     29
                  * 30
                   >             if (num_y = 0) { // y empty so far, easy case
                     31             y[0] = new_y;
                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
24   Chapter 1
    32             return;
    33         }
    34         // need to insert just before the first y
    35         // element that new_y is less than
    36         for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
    37             if (new_y < y[j]) {
    38                // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward              .
 File: ins.c     Procedure: insert    Line: 30      pc: 0x80483fc
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
(gdb) condition 1 num_y==1
(gdb) run
The program being debugged has been started already.
Start it from the beginning? (y or n)
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

Breakpoint 1, insert (new_y=5) at ins.c:30
(gdb)


    We apply the Principle of Conﬁrmation again: Since num_y is 1, line 31
should be skipped over and execution should go to line 36. But we need to
conﬁrm this, so we issue the next command to go on to the next line:

    24              y[k] = y[k-1];
    25       }
    26
    27       void insert(int new_y)
    28       { int j;
    29
 * 30           if (num_y = 0) { // y empty so far, easy case
    31              y[0] = new_y;
    32              return;
    33          }
    34          // need to insert just before the first y
    35          // element that new_y is less than
  > 36          for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
    37              if (new_y < y[j]) {
    38                 // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward             .
 File: ins.c      Procedure: insert    Line: 36      pc: 0x8048406
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
(gdb) run
The program being debugged has been started already.
Start it from the beginning? (y or n)
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

Breakpoint 1, insert (new_y=5) at ins.c:30
(gdb) next
(gdb)
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   25
                     The arrow in the upper subwindow is now at line 36, so our expecta-
                 tion is conﬁrmed; we did indeed skip line 31. Now let’s continue to single-
                 step through the program, conﬁrming assumptions about the code along
                 the way. You are now at the beginning of a loop, so issue the next command
                 again a few times and see how the loop progresses, line by line:

                     39                 // before inserting new_y
                     40                 scoot_over(j);
                     41                 y[j] = new_y;
                     42                 return;
                     43              }
                     44          }
                   > 45       }
                     46
                     47       void process_data()
                     48       {
                     49          for (num_y = 0; num_y < num_inputs; num_y++)
                     50              // insert new y in the proper place
                     51              // among y[0],...,y[num_y-1]
                     52              insert(x[num_y]);
                     53       }                                                         .
                  File: ins.c      Procedure: insert    Line: 45      pc: 0x804844d
                 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 The program being debugged has been started already.
                 Start it from the beginning? (y or n)
                 Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

                 Breakpoint 1, insert (new_y=5) at ins.c:30
                 (gdb) next
                 (gdb) next
                 (gdb)


                      Look at where the arrow is now in the upper subwindow—we went di-
                 rectly from line 37 to line 45! This is quite a surprise. We did not execute
                 even one iteration of the loop. Remember, though, that surprises are good,
                 because they give you clues as to where bugs are.
                      The only way that the loop at line 36 could have executed no iterations
                 at all is if the condition j < num_y in line 36 did not hold even when j was
                 0. Yet you know that num_y is 1, because you are in this function now after
                 having imposed the condition num_y==1 on the breakpoint. Or at least you
                 think you know this. Again, you haven’t conﬁrmed it. Check this now:

                 (gdb) print num_y
                 $2 = 0

                     Sure enough, the condition num_y==1 did hold when you entered insert(),
                 but apparently num_y has changed since then. Somehow num_y became 0 after
                 you entered this function. But how?
                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
26   Chapter 1
     As mentioned earlier, the Principle of Conﬁrmation doesn’t tell you
what the bug is, but it does give us clues to where the bug likely resides. In
this case, you have now discovered that the location is somewhere between
lines 30 and 36. And you can narrow down that range further, because you
saw that lines 31 through 33 were skipped, and lines 34 through 35 are com-
ments. In other words, the mysterious change of value in num_y occurred ei-
ther at line 30 or at line 36.
     After taking a short break—often the best debugging strategy!—we sud-
denly realize that the fault is a classic error, often made by beginning (and,
embarrassingly, by experienced) C programmers: In line 30 we used = in-
stead of ==, turning a test for equality into an assignment.
     Do you see how the inﬁnite loop thus arises? The error on line 30 sets
up a perpetual seesaw situation, in which the num_y++ portion of line 49 re-
peatedly increments num_y from 0 to 1, while the error in line 30 repeatedly
sets that variable’s value back to 0.
     So we ﬁx that humiliating bug (which ones aren’t humiliating?), recom-
pile, and try running the program again:

$ insert_sort 12 5
5
0

     We don’t have an inﬁnite loop anymore, but we don’t have the correct
output either.
     Recall from the pseudocode what your program is supposed to do
here: Initially the array y is empty. The ﬁrst iteration of the loop at line 49
is supposed to put the 12 into y[0]. Then in the second iteration, the 12 is
supposed to be shifted by one array position, to make room for insertion of
the 5. Instead, the 5 appears to have replaced the 12.
     The trouble arises with the second number (5), so you should again
focus on the second iteration. Because we wisely chose to stay in the GDB
session, rather than exiting GDB after discovering and ﬁxing the ﬁrst bug,
the breakpoint and its condition, which we set earlier, are still in effect now.
Thus we simply run the program again, and stop when the program begins
to process the second input:

    24            y[k] = y[k-1];
    25      }
    26
    27      void insert(int new_y)
    28      { int j;
    29
 * 30
  >             if (num_y == 0) { // y empty so far, easy case
    31             y[0] = new_y;
    32             return;
    33          }
    34          // need to insert just before the first y
    35          // element that new_y is less than
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   27
                     36         for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
                     37            if (new_y < y[j]) {
                     38               // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward               .
                  File: ins.c    Procedure: insert     Line: 30     pc: 0x80483fc
                 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 The program being debugged has been started already.
                 Start it from the beginning? (y or n)

                 `/debug/insert_sort' has changed; re-reading symbols.
                 Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

                 Breakpoint 1, insert (new_y=5) at ins.c:30
                 (gdb)

                     Notice the line that announces

                 `/debug/insert_sort' has changed; re-reading symbols.


                      This shows that GDB saw that we recompiled the program and automat-
                 ically reloaded the new binary and the new symbol table before running the
                 program.
                      Again, the fact that we did not have to exit GDB before recompiling our
                 program is a major convenience, for a few reasons. First, you do not need to
                 restate your command-line arguments; you just type run to re-run the pro-
                 gram. Second, GDB retains the breakpoint that you had set, so that you
                 don’t need to type it again. Here you only have one breakpoint, but typically
                 you would have several, and then this becomes a real issue. These conve-
                 niences save you typing, and more importantly they relieve you of practical
                 distractions and allow you to focus better on the actual debugging.
                      Likewise, you should not keep exiting and restarting your text editor
                 during your debugging session, which would also be a distraction and a
                 waste of time. Just keep your text editor open in one window and GDB (or
                 DDD) in another, and use a third window for trying out your program.
                      Now let’s try stepping through the code again. As before, the program
                 should skip line 31, but hopefully this time it will reach line 37, as opposed
                 to the situation earlier. Let’s check this by issuing the next command twice:

                     31            y[0] = new_y;
                     32            return;
                     33         }
                     34         // need to insert just before the first y
                     35         // element that new_y is less than
                     36         for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
                   > 37            if (new_y < y[j]) {
                     38               // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward
                     39               // before inserting new_y
                     40               scoot_over(j);
                     41               y[j] = new_y;
                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
28   Chapter 1
    42                return;
    43             }
    44         }
    45       }                                                         .
 File: ins.c     Procedure: insert   Line: 37      pc: 0x8048423
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
`/debug/insert_sort' has changed; re-reading symbols.
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

Breakpoint 1, insert (new_y=5) at ins.c:30
(gdb) next
(gdb) next
(gdb)


    We have indeed reached line 37.
    At this point, we believe the condition in the if in line 37 should hold,
because new_y should be 5, and y[0] should be 12 from the ﬁrst iteration.
The GDB output conﬁrms the former assumption. Let’s check the latter:

(gdb) print y[0]
$3 = 12

     Now that this assumption is also conﬁrmed, issue the next command,
which brings you to line 40. The function scoot_over() is supposed to shift
the 12 to the next array position, to make room for the 5. You should check
to see whether or not it does. Here you face an important choice. You could
issue the next command again, which would cause GDB to stop at line 41;
the function scoot_over() would be executed, but GDB would not stop within
that function. However, if you were to issue the step command instead, GDB
would stop at line 23, and this would allow you to single-step within scoot_over().
     Following the Top-Down Approach to Debugging described in Sec-
tion 1.3.3, we opt for the next command instead of step at line 40. When
GDB stops at line 41, you can take a look at y to see if the function did its
job correctly. If that hypothesis is conﬁrmed, you will have avoided a time-
consuming inspection of the detailed operation of the function scoot_over()
that would have contributed nothing to ﬁxing the current bug. If you fail
to conﬁrm that the function worked correctly, you can run the program in
the debugger again and enter the function using step in order to inspect the
function’s detailed operation and hopefully determine where it goes awry.
     So, when you reach line 40, type next, yielding

    31             y[0] = new_y;
    32             return;
    33         }
    34         // need to insert just before the first y
    35         // element that new_y is less than
    36         for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
    37            if (new_y < y[j]) {
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   29
                     38                // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward
                     39                // before inserting new_y
                     40                scoot_over(j);
                   > 41                y[j] = new_y;
                     42                return;
                     43             }
                     44         }
                     45       }                                                         .
                  File: ins.c     Procedure: insert    Line: 41      pc: 0x8048440
                 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 (gdb) next
                 (gdb) next
                 (gdb)


                     Did scoot_over() shift the 12 correctly? Let’s check:

                 (gdb) print y
                 $4 = {12, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}

                      Apparently not. The problem indeed lies in scoot_over(). Let’s delete
                 the breakpoint at the beginning of insert() and place one in scoot_over(),
                 again with a condition that we stop there during the second iteration of
                 line 49:

                 (gdb) clear 30
                 Deleted breakpoint 1
                 (gdb) break 23
                 Breakpoint 2 at 0x80483c3: file ins.c, line 23.
                 (gdb) condition 2 num_y==1


                     Now run the program again:

                    15          num_inputs = ac - 1;
                    16          for (i = 0; i < num_inputs; i++)
                    17          x[i] = atoi(av[i+1]);
                    18       }
                    19
                    20       void scoot_over(int jj)
                    21       { int k;
                    22
                 *> 23          for (k = num_y-1; k > jj; k++)
                    24             y[k] = y[k-1];
                    25       }
                    26
                    27       void insert(int new_y)
                    28       { int j;
                    29                                                                       .
                 File: ins.c     Procedure: scoot_over    Line: 23           pc: 0x80483c3
                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
30   Chapter 1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
(gdb) condition 2 num_y==1
(gdb) run
The program being debugged has been started already.
Start it from the beginning? (y or n)
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

Breakpoint 2, scoot_over (jj=0) at ins.c:23
(gdb)


     Once again, follow the Principle of Conﬁrmation: Think about what
you expect to occur, and then try to conﬁrm that it does occur. In this case,
the function is supposed to shift the 12 over to the next position in the ar-
ray y, which means that the loop at line 23 should go through exactly one
iteration. Let’s step through the program by repeatedly issuing the next com-
mand, in order to verify this expectation:

    15          num_inputs = ac - 1;
    16          for (i = 0; i < num_inputs; i++)
    17          x[i] = atoi(av[i+1]);
    18       }
    19
    20       void scoot_over(int jj)
    21       { int k;
    22
 * 23           for (k = num_y-1; k > jj; k++)
    24             y[k] = y[k-1];
  > 25       }
    26
    27       void insert(int new_y)
    28       { int j;
    29                                                                 .
 File: ins.c     Procedure: scoot_over    Line: 25     pc: 0x80483f1
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
The program being debugged has been started already.
Start it from the beginning? (y or n)
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

Breakpoint 2, scoot_over (jj=0) at ins.c:23
(gdb) next
(gdb) next
(gdb)


     Here we again get a surprise: We are now on line 25, without ever touch-
ing line 24—the loop executed no iterations, not the single iteration that we
had expected it to execute. Apparently there is a bug in line 23.

          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   31
                      As with the earlier loop that unexpectedly executed no iterations of its
                 body, it must be that the loop condition was not satisﬁed at the very begin-
                 ning of the loop. Is this the case here? The loop condition on line 23 is k >
                 jj. We also know from this line that k’s initial value is num_y-1, and we know
                 from our breakpoint condition that the latter quantity is 0. Finally, the GDB
                 screen tells us that jj is 0. So the condition k > jj was not satisﬁed when the
                 the loop began.
                      Thus, we misspeciﬁed either the loop condition k > jj or the initial-
                 ization k = num_y-1. Considering that the 12 should have moved from y[0]
                 to y[1] in the ﬁrst and only iteration of the loop—that is, line 24 should
                 have executed with k = 1—we realize that the loop initialization is wrong.
                 It should have been k = num_y.
                      Fix the error, recompile the program, and run the program again (out-
                 side GDB):

                 $ insert_sort 12 5
                 Segmentation fault


                      Segmentation faults, discussed in detail in Chapter 4, occur when a run-
                 ning program attempts to access memory that it does not have permission
                 to access. Typically the cause is an out-of-bounds array index or an errant
                 pointer value. Seg faults can also arise from memory references that do not
                 explicitly involve pointer or array variables. One example of this can be
                 seen in another classic C programmer’s error, forgetting the ampersand
                 in a function parameter that is passed using call-by-reference, for example,
                 writing

                 scanf("%d",x);


                 instead of

                 scanf("%d",&x);


                      In general, the main value of a debugging tool such as GDB or DDD
                 is to facilitate the process of verifying one’s coding assumptions, but in the
                 case of seg faults a debugging tool gives extra, tangible, immediate help: It
                 tells you where in your program the fault occurred.
                      To take advantage of this, you need to run insert_sort in GDB and recre-
                 ate the seg fault. First, remove your breakpoint. As seen earlier, to do this
                 you need to give the line number of the breakpoint. You might already re-
                 member this, but it is easy to look for it: Either scroll through the TUI win-
                 dow (using the up and down arrow keys), looking for lines marked with as-
                 terisks, or use GDB’s info break command. Then delete the breakpoint using
                 the clear command:

                 (gdb) clear 30


                     Now run theofprogram
                         The Art   Debuggingagain, in GDB:
                                             with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
32   Chapter 1
    19
    20       void scoot_over(int jj)
    21       { int k;
    22
    23          for (k = num_y; k > jj; k++)
  > 24             y[k] = y[k-1];
    25       }
    26
    27       void insert(int new_y)
    28       { int j;
    29
    30          if (num_y == 0) { // y empty so far, easy case
    31             y[0] = new_y;                                                              .
 File: ins.c     Procedure: scoot_over    Line: 24     pc: 0x8048538
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Start it from the beginning? (y or n)

`/debug/insert_sort' has changed; re-reading symbols.
Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5

Program received signal SIGSEGV, Segmentation fault.
0x08048538 in scoot_over (jj=0) at ins.c:24
(gdb)


     As promised, GDB tells us exactly where the seg fault occurred, at line 24,
and sure enough, an array index is apparently involved, namely k. Either k
was large enough to exceed the number of elements in y, or k-1 was nega-
tive. Clearly the ﬁrst order of business is to determine the value of k:

(gdb) print k
$4 = 584

    Whoa! The code had dimensioned y to have only 10 elements, so this
value of k is indeed far out of range. We must now track down the cause.
    First of all, determine the iteration of the grand loop at line 49 during
which this seg fault occurred.

(gdb) print num_y
$5 = 1

      So it was during the second iteration, which is the ﬁrst time the func-
tion scoot_over() is executed. In other words, it is not the case that line 23
worked ﬁne in the ﬁrst few calls to scoot_over() but failed later on. There is
still something fundamentally wrong with this line of code. And since the
only remaining candidate is the statement

k++
          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   33
                 (recall that you checked the other two portions of this line earlier), it must
                 be the culprit. After taking another break to clear our heads, we realize with
                 some embarrassment that this should have been k--.
                     Fix that line and once again recompile and run the program:

                 $ insert_sort 12 5
                 5
                 12

                     Now, that’s progress! But does the program work for a larger data set?
                 Let’s try one:

                 $ insert_sort 12 5 19 22 6 1
                 1
                 5
                 6
                 12
                 0
                 0

                     Now you can begin to see the light at the end of the tunnel. Most of the
                 array is being sorted correctly. The ﬁrst number in the list that does not get
                 sorted correctly is 19, so set a breakpoint at line 36, this time with the condi-
                 tion new_y == 19:1

                 (gdb) b 36
                 Breakpoint 3 at 0x804840d: file ins.c, line 36.
                 (gdb) cond 3 new_y==19


                      Then run the program in GDB (making sure to use the same arguments,
                 12 5 19 22 6 1). When you hit the breakpoint, you then conﬁrm that the ar-
                 ray y has been sorted correctly up to this point:

                     31                   y[0] = new_y;
                     32                   return;
                     33              }
                     34              // need to insert just before the first y
                     35              // element that new_y is less than
                  * 36
                   >                 for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
                     37                 if (new_y < y[j]) {
                     38                    // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward
                     39                    // before inserting new_y
                     40                    scoot_over(j);
                     41                    y[j] = new_y;


                 1 It’s about time to start using the common abbreviations for the commands. These include b

                 for break, i b for info break, cond for condition, r for run, n for next, s for step, c for continue, p for
                 print, and bt for backtrace.
                               The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                              (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
34   Chapter 1
    42               return;
    43            }                                                                           .
 File: ins.c    Procedure: insert     Line: 36     pc: 0x8048564
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
Start it from the beginning? (y or n)

Starting program: /debug/insert_sort 12 5 19 22 6 1

Breakpoint 2, insert (new_y=19) at ins.c:36
   (gdb) p y
   $1 = {5, 12, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0}
   (gdb)


     So far, so good. Now let’s try to determine how the program swallows
up the 19. We will step through the code one line at a time. Note that be-
cause 19 is not less than 5 or 12, we do not expect the condition in the if
statement in line 37 to hold. After hitting n a few times, we ﬁnd ourselves on
line 45:

     35         // element that new_y is less than
 *   36         for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++) {
     37             if (new_y < y[j]) {
     38                // shift y[j], y[j+1],... rightward
     39                // before inserting new_y
     40                scoot_over(j);
     41                y[j] = new_y;
     42                return;
     43             }
     44         }
   > 45      }
     46
     47      void process_data()                                                              .
 File: ins.c      Procedure: insert    Line: 45      pc: 0x80485c4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
    (gdb) n
    (gdb) n
    (gdb) n
    (gdb) n
    (gdb) n
    (gdb)


    We are on line 45, about to leave the loop, without having done any-
thing with the 19 at all! Some inspection shows that our code was not written
to cover an important case, namely that in which new_y is larger than any ele-
ment we’ve processed so far—an oversight also revealed by the comments on
lines 34 and 35:

          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   35
                   // need to insert just before the first y
                   // element that new_y is less than


                     To handle this case, add the following code just after line 44:

                    // one more case:   new_y > all existing y elements
                    y[num_y] = new_y;


                     Then recompile and try it again:

                 $ insert_sort 12 5 19 22 6 1
                 1
                 5
                 6
                 12
                 19
                 22

                     This is the correct output, and subsequent testing gives correct results as
                 well.


                 1.7.2 The Same Session in DDD
                 Let’s see how the above GDB session would have been carried out in DDD.
                 There is of course no need to repeat all the steps; simply focus on the differ-
                 ences from GDB.
                     Starting DDD is similar to starting GDB. Compile your source using
                 GCC with the -g option, and then type

                 $ ddd insert_sort


                 to invoke DDD. In GDB, you started execution of the program via the run
                 command, including arguments if any. In DDD, you click Program | Run,
                 after which you will see the screen shown in Figure 1-8.
                      A Run window has popped up, presenting you with a history of previous
                 sets of command-line arguments you’ve used. There are no previous sets yet,
                 but if there were, you could choose one of them by clicking it, or you can
                 type a new set of arguments, as shown here. Then click Run.
                      In the GDB debugging session, we ran our program for a while in the
                 debugger and then suspended it using CTRL-C, in order to investigate an
                 apparently inﬁnite loop. In DDD, we suspend the program by clicking Inter-
                 rupt in the Command Tool. The DDD screen now looks like the one in Fig-
                 ure 1-9. Because DDD acts as a front end to GDB, this mouse click is trans-
                 lated to a CTRL-C operation in GDB, which can be seen in the Console.
                      The next step in the GDB session above was to inspect the variable num_y.
                 As shown earlier in Section 1.5, you do this in DDD by moving the mouse
                 pointer over any instance of num_y in the Source Window.
                           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
36   Chapter 1
Figure 1-8: DDD Run command



     You can also inspect entire arrays in the same way. For example, at one
point in the GDB session, you printed out the entire array y. In DDD, you
would simply move the mouse pointer to any instance of y in the Source
window. If you move the cursor over the y in the expression y[j] on line 30,
the screen will appear as shown in Figure 1-10. A value tip box has appeared
near that line, showing the contents of y.
     Your next action in the GDB session was to set a breakpoint at line 30.
We have already explained how to set breakpoints in DDD, but what about
putting a condition on the breakpoint, as was needed in this case? You can
set a condition by right-clicking the stop sign icon in the breakpoint line and
then choosing Properties. A pop-up window will appear, as seen in Figure 1-11.
Then type your condition, num_y==1.
     To then re-run the program, you would click Run in the Command
Tool. As with GDB’s run command with no arguments, this button runs the
program with the last set of arguments that was provided.
     DDD’s analogs of GDB’s n and s commands are the Next and Step but-
tons in the Command Tool. The analog of GDB’s c is the Cont button.
     This overview is enough to get you started with DDD. In later chapters
we will explore some of DDD’s advanced options, such as its highly useful
capability of visually displaying complex data structures such as linked lists
and binary trees.

          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   37
                 Figure 1-9: After the interrupt



                 1.7.3 The Session in Eclipse
                 Now let’s see how the above GDB session would have been carried out in
                 Eclipse. As in our presentation on DDD, there is no need to repeat all the
                 steps; we’ll simply focus on the differences from GDB.
                      Note that Eclipse can be rather ﬁnicky. Though it offers many ways to
                 accomplish a certain task, if you do not strictly follow the necessary sequence
                 of steps, you may ﬁnd yourself in a bind with no intuitive solution other than
                 to restart part of your debugging process.
                      We assume here that you have already created your C/C++ project.2
                      The ﬁrst time you run/debug your program, you will need run and de-
                 bug conﬁgurations. These specify the name of your executable (and what
                 project it belongs to), its command-line arguments (if any), its special shell
                 variable environment (if any), your debugger of choice, and so on. A run
                 conﬁguration is used to run your program outside the debugger, while a
                 debug conﬁguration is used within the debugger. Make sure to create both
                 conﬁgurations, in that order, as follows:
                 1.   Select Run | Open Run Dialog.


                 2 Since this is a book about debugging, not project management, we will not say much here

                 about creating and building projects in Eclipse. A quick summary, though, would be that you
                 create a project as follows: Select File | New | Project; choose C (or C++) Project; ﬁll in a project
                 name; select Executable | Finish. A makeﬁle is created automatically. You build (i.e., compile
                 and link) your project by selecting Project | Build Project.
                              The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                             (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
38   Chapter 1
Figure 1-10: Inspecting the array



2.   Right-click C/C++ Local Applications and select New.
3.   Select the Main tab, and ﬁll in your run conﬁguration, project and ex-
     ecutable ﬁle names (Eclipse will probably suggest them for you), and
     check the Connect process input and output to a terminal box if you
     have terminal I/O.
4.   If you have command-line arguments or special environment variables,
     click the Arguments or Environment tab, and ﬁll in the desired settings.
5.   Select the Debugger tab to see which debugger is being used. You prob-
     ably will not have to touch this, but it’s good to understand that there is
     an underlying debugger, probably GDB.
6.   Hit Apply (if asked) and Close to complete creation of your run conﬁgu-
     ration.
7.   Start creating your debug conﬁguration by selecting Run | Open Debug
     Dialog. Eclipse will probably reuse the information you supplied in your
     run conﬁguration, as shown in Figure 1-12, or you can change it if you
     wish. Again, hit Apply (if asked) and Close to complete creation of your
     debug conﬁguration.
         One can create several run/debug conﬁgurations, typically with dif-
     ferent sets of command-line arguments.


           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                   Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   39
                 Figure 1-11: Imposing a condition on the breakpoint



                      To start your debugging session, you must move to the Debug perspec-
                 tive by selecting Window | Open Perspective | Debug. (There are various
                 shortcuts, which we’ll leave to you to discover.)
                      The ﬁrst time you actually execute a run or debug action, you do so via
                 Run | Open Run Dialog or Run | Open Debug Dialog again, as the case may
                 be, in order to state which conﬁguration to use. After that, though, simply
                 select Run | Run or Run | Debug, either of which will rerun the last debug
                 conﬁguration.
                      In fact, in the debug case, there is a quicker why to launch a debug run,
                 which is to click the Debug icon right under Navigate (see Figure 1-13).
                 Note carefully, though, that whenever you start a new debug run, you need
                 to kill existing ones by clicking a red Terminate square; one is in the toolbar
                 of the Debug view, and another is in the Console view. The Debug view also
                 has a double-X icon, Remove All Terminated Launches.
                      Figure 1-13 shows the screen as it appears after you have launched your
                 debug. One can set the starting line in Eclipse debug dialogs, but they typi-
                 cally default to placing an automatic breakpoint at the ﬁrst executable line
                 of code. In the ﬁgure, you can see this from the breakpoint symbol in the
                 left margin of the line

                            The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                           (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
40   Chapter 1
Figure 1-12: Debug conﬁguration dialog




{ get_args(argc,argv);


     That line is also highlighted, as it is the line you are about to execute.
Go ahead and execute it by clicking the Resume icon in the Debug view
toolbar (above a box that popped up in the window because you moved the
mouse pointer to that icon).
     Recall that in the sample GDB session, the ﬁrst version of the program
had an inﬁnite loop, and the program was hanging. Here of course you
will see the same symptom, with no output in the Console view. You need
to kill the program. However, you do not want to do so by clicking one of
the red Terminate squares, because this would also kill your underlying
GDB session. You want to stay in GDB in order to take a look at where you
were in the code—i.e., the location of the inﬁnite loop—examine the values
of variables, and so on. So, instead of a Terminate operation, choose Sus-
pend, clicking the icon to the right of Resume in the Debug view toolbar.
(In Eclipse literature, this button is sometimes called Pause, as its symbol is
similar to that for pause operations in media players.)
     After clicking Suspend, your screen looks like Figure 1-14. You’ll see
that just before that operation, Eclipse was about to execute the line

for (j = 0; j < num_y; j++)    {



          The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
         (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                  Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   41
                 Figure 1-13: Start of a debug run



                      You can now examine the value of num_y by moving the mouse pointer to
                 any instance of that variable in the source window (you ﬁnd that the value is
                 0), and so on.
                      Recall again our GDB session above. After ﬁxing a couple of bugs, your
                 program then had a segmentation fault. Figure 1-15 shows your Eclipse
                 screen at that point.
                      What had happened was that we had clicked Resume, so our program
                 was running, but it suddenly halted, at the line

                 y[k] = y[k-1];


                 due to the seg fault. Oddly, Eclipse does not announce this in the Problems
                 tab, but it does do so in the Debug tab, with the error message

                 (Suspended'SIGSEGV' received.       Description:   Segmentation fault.)


                 again visible in Figure 1-15.
                     You see in that tab that the fault occurred in the function scoot_over(),
                 which had been called from insert(). Again you can query the values of the
                 variables and ﬁnd, for instance, that k = 544—way out of range, as in the
                 GDB example.
                     In the GDB example you also set conditional breakpoints. Recall that
                 in Eclipse you set a breakpoint by double-clicking in the left margin of the
                            The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                           (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
42   Chapter 1
         Figure 1-14: Program suspended



         desired line. To make that breakpoint conditional, then right-click the
         breakpoint symbol for that line, and select Breakpoint Properties... | New |
         Common, and ﬁll in the condition in the dialog. The dialog is depicted in
         Figure 1-16.
             Recall too that in your GDB session you occasionally executed your pro-
         gram outside GDB, in a separate terminal window. You can easily do that in
         Eclipse too, by selecting Run | Run. The results will be in the Console view,
         as usual.


1.8   Use of Startup Files
         As mentioned earlier, it is usually a good idea to not exit GDB while you re-
         compile your code. This way your breakpoints and various other actions you
         set up (for example, display commands, to be discussed in Chapter 3) are re-
         tained. If you were to exit GDB, you would have to type these all over again.
              However, you may need to exit GDB before you are ﬁnished debugging.
         If you are quitting for a break or for the day, and you cannot stay logged in
         to the computer, you’ll need to exit GDB. In order to not lose them, you can
         put your commands for breakpoints and other settings in a GDB startup ﬁle,
         and then they will be loaded automatically every time you start up GDB.
              GDB’s startup ﬁles are named .gdbinit by default. You can have one
         in your home directory for general purposes and another in the directory
         containing a particular project for purposes speciﬁc to that project. For in-
                   The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                  (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                           Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   43
                 Figure 1-15: Seg fault



                 stance, you would put commands to set breakpoints in a startup ﬁle in the
                 latter directory. In your .gdbinit ﬁle in your home directory, you may wish
                 to store some general-purpose macros you’ve developed, as discussed in
                 Chapter 2.
                      GDB reads the startup ﬁle in your home directory before it loads an exe-
                 cutable. So if you were to have a command in your home directory’s .gdbinit
                 ﬁle such as

                 break g


                 saying to break at the function g(), then GDB would always complain at
                 startup that it does not know that function. However, the line would be ﬁne
                 in your local project directory’s startup ﬁle, because the local startup ﬁle is
                 read after the executable (and its symbol table) has been loaded. Note that
                 this feature of GDB implies that it is best to not put programming projects in
                 your home directory, as you would not be able to put project-speciﬁc infor-
                 mation in .gdbinit.
                      You can specify the startup ﬁle at the time you invoke GDB. For example,

                 $ gdb -command=z x




                            The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
                           (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
44   Chapter 1
Figure 1-16: Making a breakpoint conditional



would say to run GDB on the executable ﬁle x, ﬁrst reading in commands
from the ﬁle z. Also, because DDD is just a front end for GDB, invoking
DDD will invoke GDB’s startup ﬁles as well.
    Finally, you can customize DDD in various ways by selecting Edit | Prefer-
ences. For Eclipse, the sequence is Window | Preferences.




           The Art of Debugging with GDB, DDD, and Eclipse
          (C) 2008 by Norman Matloff and Peter Jay Salzman
                                                   Some Preliminaries for Beginners and Pros   45
