                              3
       Herding Cats: Using Level
         Design to Tell Stories
In this chapter, you’ll learn about level design, which is the
blueprint of each level in a game. A level can be one scene
in a game, one room, one area, or one part of the journey
through the game. For example, each puzzle in Herding Cats
is one level. You can imagine the whole game as a tower of
levels: each one is stacked on top of the other, and the ­players
work their way through the stack one level at a time.

                              45
            Level design tells stories. It shows a player what’s important and
        can teach the player the fundamental ideas of your game. For example,
        in Herding Cats you sometimes need to use a cat to reach another cat.
        You can use level design to develop those ideas; use it in trickier, harder
        ways; and mix it up to create something unexpected. Level design can
        surprise the player or make them feel different emotions, such as smart,
        excited, scared, frustrated, or curious.
            Think of each level in a game as a kind of tiny game, each with its
        own challenges and solutions. The characters might be the same, but the
        situation changes with each new level; each new level teaches the player
        more about the characters and the game.




Using the Level Editor
        In this section, we’ll create levels for Herding Cats using PuzzleScript’s
        built-­in level editor. We’ll identify the important ideas in Herding Cats
        and figure out how to introduce them to the player. Then we’ll build on
        them. We’ll think about what goes into a good level and what levels go
        into a well-­paced, complete game. And we’ll tell a little story while we’re
        at it.
             Let’s start by building the smallest possible level using the built-­in
        level editor. Enter the following in your PuzzleScript game’s LEVELS
        section to build a level. Or visit bit.ly/catswithoutlevels for a fully
        programmed copy of the game with the levels missing.

         =======
         LEVELS
         =======
         ###
         #m#
         #.#
         #p#
         ###




46   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
         This creates your first level with one cat (m), a starting position for
     the player (p), an empty space in between them (.), and walls (#).


     Playing a Level
     To play the level you just entered, you can use a handy shortcut: hold
     down the ctrl key on your keyboard (command key on Mac) and click
     the level. It should pop up immediately in the game, ready to play, as
     shown here.




                                    Pretty much the smallest ­Herding
                                    Cats level you can make


         Press the up arrow to wake up the kitty and win!


     Editing a Level
     Now let’s edit the level you entered to make it more interesting. To
     enter editing mode, ctrl-click the level again and, while pressing ctrl,
     press the E key. A row of objects should appear that includes the letter
     S, some grass, a wall, the player, and a cat, as shown in the following
     figure. (The cat should just be a pair of yellow eyes, because it’s a black
     cat on a black background.) We’ll call this the level editor palette.




Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                         47
                                          Editing mode


            Click an object from the palette to select it, and then click in the level
        to place it. Try selecting the cat, and then click the player in your level
        to change the player into a cat. To erase the placed objects, right-­click
        them.


        Enlarging a Level
        To enlarge the level, click an edge, and then move your cursor to the
        far left, far right, top, or bottom of the level. The cursor should change
        from a box to crosshairs (+). Click when the cursor looks like crosshairs
        to grow the level by one row or column in that direction. Right-­click to
        shrink the level. Try making the level bigger and then redrawing the
        walls to fit the new level. Here’s what an enlarged level with two cats
        would look like.



            Note: To play your level while editing it, press the arrow keys.
            (You might have to add a new player to the game if you turned the
            player into a cat earlier.)




48   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
     Enlarged level



     Saving and Printing Your Level
     Once you finish editing a level in editing mode, save it by clicking the S
     from the palette. The box below the game should now display the text
     version of your new level.




     PuzzleScript levels can also be represented in text.

         Note that the text version displays the code for the level as it exists at
     that very moment. So if you moved the player in editing mode, the code
     should now display the player in their new position. But if you woke
     up all the cats, there should be no cats shown in the code because the
     LEGEND section has no code for an awake cat.
         Be sure to click S a lot when you’re working on levels to make sure
     you don’t accidentally lose your work!




Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                    49
        Adding Your New Level to Your Game
        Once you’re done updating your level in editing mode, you’ll need to
        copy and paste the updated PuzzleScript code into your game’s LEVELS
        section.
            To copy and paste the new level, highlight the text version of your
        level. Next, right-­click and select Copy to copy the text of the level to
        your operating system’s clipboard. (You won’t see the clipboard; the text
        will just be saved invisibly.) Then right-­click under LEVELS and select
        Paste to paste your new level into your game’s LEVELS section! You
        can also drag and drop the highlighted text into your LEVELS section.
            The result should look like this.

        =======
        LEVELS
        =======
        ########
        #...m..#
        #......#
        #...m..#
        #......#
        #......#
        ########




        Testing Your Levels
        To test your levels without totally rearranging them, press R (Reset). But
        be careful! Pressing R will reset your level to the way it was before you
        first pressed E to enter editing mode. If you changed your level since you
        started editing, pressing R will undo all of your changes! Eek!
             But there’s a solution to this problem: to test a level, press E twice
        (once to exit editing mode and once to reenter it), and then play your
        level. Now when you press R, the level should again reset to the way it
        was when you pressed E. Click the S button to print your level.
             Be sure to play your levels a lot while you’re working on them, and
        save them even more frequently.




50   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
Levels Tell a Story
      Let’s build some levels for our Herding Cats game. What would be a good
      starting level? Your game’s first level should introduce the game’s story
      (the player tries to make friends with cats) and show the player the goal
      of each level, which is to wake up cats.
           This figure shows a starting level that I came up with. See if you can
      re-­create it in the editor.




                                     Level 1: Cat friend #1




  Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                  51
            This first level is very simple: when the player touches the cat, the
        level ends. The player doesn’t know why they’re befriending cats yet. But
        you can help them figure this out by adding a message in PuzzleScript to
        give them some context about what’s going on. In your game’s LEVELS
        section, enter the word Message followed by what you want your message
        to be (for example, Oh, a kitty!). The words you enter in your message
        will display on the screen between levels (without the word Message).

        =======
        LEVELS
        =======
        Message Oh, a kitty!
        ########
        #...m..#
        #......#
        #...m..#
        #......#
        #......#
        ########
        Message Hi, kitty.

            Let’s add the message Oh, a kitty! to make it appear before the level
        begins at the very start of the game to establish that the kitty is import-
        ant. Then let’s show the message Hi, kitty. when the level ends, to tell




52   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
       the player that meeting the kitty was what they were supposed to do. The
       player will also see some text reminding them to press X to continue the
       game, as shown here.




       This is what a message looks like in the game.

           That completes our first level for Herding Cats! By the end of this
       level, the player should know the basic point of the game.




Levels Teach the Player the Rules
       We’ve introduced the idea of meeting cats as a game goal. The next
       important rule we need the player to understand is that cats will follow
       the player around. How can we make a level to teach the player that rule?




       Level 2: Cats like to tag along.

           To finish this second level, the player must pass by two cats to get
       to the third cat on the right. As they pass the cats, the cats perk up and
       follow. The level ends when the player has met every cat.



  Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                     53
        Troubleshooting
        But what about the cat from the first level? Could that cat still be follow-
        ing the player? Let’s modify our level to add a cat sidekick. Here’s what
        the level looks like now.




        Level 2B: The player starts level 2 with their cat friend from level 1.

             Build this level and try it. Uh-oh, there’s a problem. Did you find it?
             When you move the player, the cat from Level 1 doesn’t follow. You
        can go back and wake up the cat, but we want the cat to be following
        the player already because this is a friend we made on Level 1!
             The problem occurs because of the PuzzleScript rules we set in Chap-
        ter 2. The rule that tells PuzzleScript to turn sleeping cats into awake cats
        is a late rule that triggers only when the player moves. But because the
        player hasn’t moved yet, no rules have triggered!


        Running Rules at the Start of a Level
        Fortunately, we can solve the problem of the first cat friend following
        the player by making sure all the rules run at the beginning of every
        level, before the player does anything. To make that happen, just add
        run_rules_on_level_start to the beginning of your PuzzleScript code,
        as shown here.

         title Herding Cats
         author anna anthropy
         homepage www.puzzlescript.net
         run_rules_on_level_start




54   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
           Now click Rebuild and restart your level. The new cat should
       follow the player. The player should start level 2 by walking around
       with their cat friend from level 1. As they pass the two cats on the left,
       the cats wake up and start following them. Then, with an entourage of
       three cats accompanying the player, they meet a fourth and final cat,
       and the level is complete. Let’s end with another message, just to make
       the story complete.

        message Oh, hi to you too!

           That’s a whole little story right there!




Levels Challenge Players to
Use What They Know
       So far we’ve taught the player that cats they touch will follow them
       around and that the goal is to get every cat to follow them. Now that
       they know those rules, let’s create a puzzle that will challenge them to
       use what they know.
           Can you make a level that forces the player to think carefully about
       the order in which they wake up the cats?




       Level 3: A close fit!




  Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                 55
            Level 3 has two rooms with two cats each and a super narrow
        passage between them. If the player isn’t careful about how they herd
        their cats, they won’t be able to make it through the gap, as shown in
        the figure. Try to solve the level. Do you see how this level tests what the
        player has learned?




        Level 3: Stuck!

            If the player doesn’t think carefully about the shape of their group,
        they’ll get stuck!




        Level 3 solution

            To get through this level, the player needs to arrange all the cats in
        the group to fit through the narrow hole.




56   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
Learning from Mistakes
       Let’s try to arrange the cats in Level 3 a little differently. We’ll put them
       across from each other horizontally instead of on a diagonal. How might
       that affect how the player thinks about shaping their group?




       Level 3B: What if the cats were arranged differently?

           Every player thinks a little differently. But it’s likely that the player
       will have an easier time finding the solution with this setup. The cats are
       already lined up the way they need to be to fit through the narrow hole!
       So does this level change make the level better?
           I would say no, because making mistakes is an important part of play.
       In Herding Cats, when the player makes a mistake and gets stuck, that’s
       when they realize they need to think more carefully about where their
       cat friends are. When they make mistakes, they learn about how the
       game works and how they need to think to solve puzzles. Messing up is
       important!




Design Your Own Levels!
       Try designing some levels of your own for the game! Here are some ideas:

           • Make a level that’s harder than the previous level but
               only a little bit. Then try to make a level that’s a little bit harder
               than that! It’s much trickier to make a not-­too-­hard level than a




  Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                     57
              very hard level. Imagine if your favorite game skipped straight
              to the hardest level. You would have no idea what to do: the in-­​
              between levels help you learn how to handle harder challenges!
              If you make a level that’s too hard, think about what you could
              do to simplify it.

           • Make the hardest level you can in the smallest amount
              of screen space. Think carefully about where you put your
              objects. How many do you really need to make an interesting
              level?

           • Make levels that tell stories! When the first level ends with
              the player making friends with a cat and the second level starts
              with that cat friend still hanging out, that’s storytelling! It’s a
              simple story, but it makes the player care about the game. What
              other ways can you come up with to tell simple stories?

           • Make some levels with multiple players. When you add
              multiple player objects, what kind of puzzles can you come
              up with?




58   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
          Remember to play your levels while you’re working on them! Pay
      attention to what you’re thinking and experiencing when you play each
      level. What is your first instinct in a level? Is it to go a particular way,
      and if so, why? If something about a level seems a little rough, make it
      better and then play it again! As you build levels, you’ll develop your
      intuition for level design.
          When you’ve completed your game, have friends play your levels to
      get a sense of how others experience a level. Remember that as the game
      developer, you know all there is to know about the game. But what’s
      easy for you might be hard for someone else. It’s important to see how
      other people react to your creations.
          While you’re watching someone else play your levels, pay attention
      to what they do. Try to resist the urge to explain to them what they’re
      supposed to be doing or why you made a particular part a certain way.
      Your goal should be to get an idea of what players will do when you’re
      not there.
          It takes a lot of work to become a good level designer. Listen to your
      own instincts and to other people’s feedback. The more levels you make,
      the better you’ll get at it!




Sharing Your Game
      When you’ve finished your PuzzleScript game, you can share it! Shar-
      ing a PuzzleScript game is super easy! Just click Share at the top of the
      screen. You’ll need to create a GitHub account.




      Click the Share button to create a link to your game.

          When you click Share, PuzzleScript creates two links: one opens
      your game in the PuzzleScript editor, and the other leads to your play-
      able game.




 Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                  59
            Share that second link with friends so they can play your game! They
        can also open your game in the editor by clicking the hack link at the
        bottom of the page.




        PuzzleScript generates links to your game.

            You can also save a copy of your game to your computer by click-
        ing Export at the top of the screen. Exporting your game creates an
        HTML file on your computer that you can open to play your finished
        game. This version doesn’t have the hack link, so if you want to keep
        your game code a secret, export it and upload it to a free website, such
        as https://neocities.org!




Bonus Challenges
        Here are a couple of graphical tricks I added to Herding Cats to make the
        game look more interesting. Can you figure out how to do them? If you
        need some hints, open my finished version of the game at https://w.itch
        .io/herding-­cats and check out how I did them.


        Levels with Different Shapes
        The first graphical trick is a simple one. Instead of being completely rect-
        angular, the levels are all different shapes.




60   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
    Creating levels with funky shapes

        This trick is easy! I just made a totally black object and used it to fill
    the space outside the walls. So instead of the stages looking like big rect-
    angles, they have unique shapes.


    Four Types of Cats
    The other graphical change is more complicated: instead of just one type
    of cat, there are four different kinds, as you can see here.




    Sleeping and awake cats




Chapter 3 Herding Cats: Using Level Design to Tell Stories                     61
            This trick involves creating sleeping and waking versions of all four
        kinds of cats, plus a generic cat object to put in levels. At the start of a
        level, each generic cat will randomly become one of the four kinds of cats.
        (Read through the RULES section in my finished version of the game to
        see how this happens!)
            One note about the editor: if you rebuild the game after adding new
        objects, the level editor might get confused about what order the objects
        are in. Whenever you add a new object, click the Run button to make
        sure PuzzleScript updates correctly. Clicking Rebuild is still fine when
        you’re making changes within levels or to objects’ appearances.




What You Learned
        Well, that’s it for Herding Cats! In this chapter, you learned how to use
        PuzzleScript’s level editor to tell stories, teach the player the rules, and
        challenge the player’s understanding of those rules.
            Next, you’ll make a game called Robot Heist and learn how to create
        obstacles like lasers. You’ll also explore some clever ways to use the level
        editor to make your game more interesting. Soon you’ll be a PuzzleScript
        master!




62   MAKE YOUR OWN PUZZLESCRIPT GAMES
