                                                                     E
                                                                        2 TI
                                                                         D
                                                                         N O
                                                                           I
                                                                            D N
                          THE

IDA PRO
                  BOOK
      T H E   UNOFFICIAL GUIDE TO THE
 W O R L D’ S   M O S T   P O P U L A R   D I S A S S E M B L E R



                      CHRIS E AGLE


                                                  “I wholeheartedly recommend The
                                                    IDA Pro Book to all IDA Pro users.”
                                                               —Ilfak Guilfanov,
                                                              creator of IDA Pro
                JM




EB
  P
                  P
         B
       SU
                             THE IDA DEBUGGER




                           IDA is most widely known as a disassem-
            JM




EB                        bler, and it is clearly one of the finest tools
  P
              P




                        available for performing static analysis of
        B
      SU




                    binaries. Given the sophistication of modern
              anti–static analysis techniques, it is not uncommon
              to combine static analysis tools and techniques with
              dynamic analysis tools and techniques in order to take advantage of the best
              of both worlds. Ideally, all of these tools would be integrated into a single pack-
              age. Hex-Rays made that move when it introduced a debugger in version 4.5
              of IDA and solidified IDA’s role as a general-purpose reverse engineering
              tool. With each successive version of IDA, its debugging capabilities have been
              improved. In its latest version, IDA is capable of local and remote debugging
              on a number of different platforms and supports a number of different pro-
              cessors. IDA may also be configured to act as a frontend to Microsoft’s WinDbg
              debugger, making it possible to perform Windows kernel debugging.
                  Over the course of the next few chapters, we will cover the basic features
              of IDA’s debugger, using the debugger to assist with obfuscated code analysis
              and remote debugging of Windows, Linux, or OS X binaries. While we assume

                                The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                   © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                    that the reader possesses some familiarity with the use of debuggers, we will
                    review many of the basic capabilities of debuggers in general as we progress
                    through the features of IDA’s debugger.

      Launching the Debugger
                    Debuggers are typically used to perform one of two tasks: examining memory
                    images (core dumps) associated with crashed processes and executing pro-
                    cesses in a very controlled manner. A typical debugging session begins with
                    the selection of a process to debug. There are two ways this is generally
                    accomplished. First, most debuggers are capable of attaching to a running
                    process (assuming the user has permission to do so). Depending on the
                    debugger being used, the debugger itself may be able to present a list of
                    available processes to choose from. Lacking such capability, the user must
                    determine the ID of the process to which he wishes to attach and then com-
                    mand the debugger to attach to the specified process. The precise manner
                    by which a debugger attaches to a process varies from one operating system
                    to another and is beyond the scope of this book. When attaching to an exist-
                    ing process, it is not possible to monitor or control the process’s initial startup
                    sequence, because all of the startup and initialization code will already have
                    completed before you have a chance to attach to the process.
                         The manner by which you attach to a process with the IDA debugger
                    depends on whether a database is currently open or not. When no database
                    is open, the Debugger Attach menu is available, as shown in Figure 24-1.




                    Figure 24-1: Attaching to an arbitrary
                    process

                        Available options allow selection of different IDA debuggers (remote
                    debugging is covered in Chapter 26). Options vary depending on the plat-
                    form on which you are running IDA. Selecting a local debugger causes IDA
                    to display a list of running processes to which you may attach. Figure 24-2
                    shows an example of such a list.




514    Chapter 24                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                           © 2011 by Chris Eagle
Figure 24-2: Debugger process-selection dialog

     Once a process has been selected, the debugger creates a temporary
database by taking a memory snapshot of the running process. In addition
to the memory image of the running process, the temporary database con-
tains sections for all shared libraries loaded by the process, resulting in a sub-
stantially larger and more cluttered database than you may be accustomed
to. One drawback to attaching to a process in this manner is that IDA has less
information available to disassemble the process because IDA’s loader never
processes the corresponding executable file
image and an automated analysis of the binary
is never performed. In fact, once the debugger
has attached to the process, the only instruc-
tions that will be disassembled in the binary are
the instruction referenced by the instruction
pointer and those that flow from it. Attaching
to a process immediately pauses the process,
allowing you the opportunity to set breakpoints
prior to resuming execution of the process.
     An alternate way to attach to a running
process is to open the associated executable in
IDA before attempting to attach to the running
process. With a database open, the Debugger
menu takes on an entirely different form, as
shown in Figure 24-3.
     If you are not presented with this menu
(or one very like it), then you probably have
not yet specified a debugger to use for the cur-
rently open file type. In such cases, Debugger       Figure 24-3: Debugger
Select Debugger will present a list of suitable      menu with a database
                                                     open
debuggers given the current file type. Figure
24-4 shows a typical debugger selection dialog.




                    The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition             T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   515
                       © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                   Figure 24-4: Debugger selection dialog

                        You may make your selection the default debugger for the current file
                   type by checking the box at the bottom of the dialog. The current default
                   debugger, if any, is noted just above the checkbox. Once you have selected
                   a debugger, you may change debuggers at any time via the Debug Switch
                   Debugger menu.
                        When Debugger Attach to Process is selected, IDA’s behavior will vary
                   depending on the type of file opened in the active database. If the file is an
                   executable file, IDA will display a list of all processes that have the same name
                   as the file opened in the database. If IDA can find no process with a match-
                   ing name, IDA will display a list of every running process and leave it to you
                   to choose the correct process to attach to. In any case, you may attach to any
                   of the displayed processes, but IDA has no way to guarantee that the process
                   was started with same binary image that is loaded in the open IDA database.
                        IDA behaves differently if the currently open database is a shared library.
                   On Windows systems, IDA will filter the displayed process list to just those
                   processes that have the corresponding .dll file loaded. For example, if you
                   are currently analyzing wininet.dll in IDA, then when you select Debugger
                   Attach to Process, you will see only those processes that currently have
                   wininet.dll loaded. On Linux and OS X systems, IDA does not have this
                   filtering ability and displays every process to which you have the rights to
                   attach.
                        As an alternative to attaching to an existing process, you may opt to launch
                   a new process under debugger control. With no database open, a new pro-
                   cess can be launched via Debugger Run. When a database is open, a new
                   process can be launched via Debugger Start Process or Debugger Run
                   to Cursor. Using the former causes the new process to execute until it hits a
                   breakpoint (which you need to have set prior to choosing Debugger Start
                   Process) or until you elect to pause the process using Debugger Pause Pro-
                   cess. Using Debugger Run to Cursor automatically sets a breakpoint at the
                   current cursor location prior to starting the new process. In this case, the new
                   process will execute until the current cursor location is reached or until an




516   Chapter 24                      The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                         © 2011 by Chris Eagle
earlier breakpoint is hit. If execution never reaches the current cursor loca-
tion (or any other breakpoint), the process will continue to run until it is
forcibly paused or terminated (Debugger Terminate Process).
     Launching a process under debugger control (as opposed to attaching
to an existing process) is the only way to monitor every action the process
takes. With breakpoints set prior to process initiation, it becomes possible
to closely monitor a process’s entire startup sequence. Controlling startup
sequences is particularly important in the case of programs that have been
obfuscated, because you will often want to pause the process immediately
after the de-obfuscation routines complete and before the process begins
its normal operations.
     Another advantage to launching a process from an open IDA database is
that IDA performs its initial autoanalysis on the process image before launch-
ing the process. This results in significantly better disassembly quality over
that attained when attaching the debugger to an existing process.
     IDA’s debugger is capable of both local and remote debugging. For local
debugging, you can only debug binaries that will run on your platform. There
is no emulation layer that allows binaries from alternate platforms or CPU
types to be executed within IDA’s local debugger. For remote debugging,
IDA ships with a number of debugging servers including implementations
for Windows 32/64, Windows CE/ARM, Mac OS X 32/64, Linux 32/64/
ARM, and Android. The debugging servers are intended to execute along-
side the binary that you intend to debug. Once you have a remote debugging
server running, IDA can communicate with the server to launch or attach
to a target process on the remote machine. For Windows CE ARM devices,
IDA communicates with the remote device using ActiveSync and installs the
debugging server remotely. IDA is also capable of communicating with the
gdbserver1 component of the GNU Debugger2 (gdb) or with programs that
are linked with a suitable gdb remote stub.3 Finally, for remote debugging on
Symbian devices, you must install and configure Metrowerk’s App TRK4 in
order for IDA to communicate with the device over a serial port. In any case,
IDA is capable of acting as a debugger frontend only for processing running
on x86, x64, MIPS, ARM, and PPC processors. Remote debugging is dis-
cussed in Chapter 26.
     As with any other debugger, if you intend to use IDA’s debugger to
launch new processes, the original executable file is required to be present
on the debugging host, and the original binary will be executed with the
full privileges of the user running IDA. In other words, it is not sufficient to
have only an IDA database loaded with the binary you wish to debug. This is
extremely important to understand if you intend to use the IDA debugger
for malware analysis. You can easily infect the debugging target machine if
you fail to properly control the malware sample. IDA attempts to warn you of


1. See http://www.sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb/Server.html#Server.
2. See http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/.
3. See http://www.sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb/Remote-Stub.html#Remote-Stub.
4. See http://www.tools.ext.nokia.com/agents/index.htm.

                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition                        T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   517
                          © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                    this possibility anytime you select Debugger Start Process (or Debugger
                    Attach to process with an open database) by displaying a debugger warning
                    message stating the following:
                             You are going to launch the debugger. Debugging a program
                             means that its code will be executed on your system.
                             Be careful with malicious programs, viruses and trojans!
                             REMARK: if you select ‘No’, the debugger will be automatically
                             disabled.
                             Are you sure you want to continue?
                        Selecting No in response to this warning causes the Debugger menu
                    to be removed from the IDA menu bar. The Debugger menu will not be
                    restored until you close the active database.
                        It is highly recommended that you perform any debugging of malicious
                    software within a sandbox environment. In contrast, the x86 emulator plug-
                    in discussed in Chapter 21 neither requires that the original binary be present
                    nor executes any of the binary’s instructions on the machine performing the
                    emulation.

      Basic Debugger Displays
                    Regardless of how you happen to launch the debugger, once your process of
                    interest has been paused under debugger control, IDA enters its debugger
                    mode (as opposed to normal disassembly mode), and you are presented with
                    several default displays. The default debugger display is shown in Figure 24-5.




                    Figure 24-5: IDA debugger display




518    Chapter 24                      The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                          © 2011 by Chris Eagle
     If you are accustomed to using other Windows debuggers such as
OllyDbg5 or Immunity Debugger,6 one of your first thoughts might be that
not much information is displayed on the screen. This is primarily a result
of the fact that IDA defaults to a font size that is actually readable. If you find
yourself missing the micro fonts used in other debuggers, you can easily
change things via the Options Font menu. You may also wish to make use
of saved IDA desktops (Windows Save Desktop) if you develop a fondness
for a specific layout of your debugger windows.
     As shown in the Figure 24-5, the debugger toolbar X replaces the dis-
assembly toolbar. A number of standard (from a debugging standpoint)
tools are present, including process control tools and breakpoint manipula-
tion tools.
     The IDA View-EIP Y disassembly window is a default disassembly listing
window when the debugger is active. It also happens to be synchronized with
the current value of the instruction pointer register. If IDA detects that a reg-
ister points to a memory location within the disassembly window, the name
of that register is displayed in the left margin, opposite the address to which
the register points. In Figure 24-5, the location to which EIP points is flagged
in IDA View-EIP (note that EDX also points to the same location in this exam-
ple). By default, IDA highlights breakpoints in red and the next instruction
to be executed (the one to which the instruction pointer points) in blue.
Debugger-related disassemblies are generated via the same disassembly pro-
cess used in standard disassembly mode. Thus, IDA’s debugger offers per-
haps the best disassembly capability to be found in a debugger. Additionally,
if you launched the debugger from an open IDA database, IDA is able to
characterize all of the executable content based on analysis performed prior
to launching the debugger. IDA’s ability to disassemble any library code that
has been loaded by the process will be somewhat more limited because IDA
has not had a chance to analyze the associated .dll file prior to launching the
debugger.
     The Stack View Z window is another standard disassembly view primarily
used to display the data contents of the process’s runtime stack. All registers
that point to stack locations are noted as such in the General Registers [
view (such as EBP in this case). Through the use of comments, IDA makes
every attempt to provide context information for each data item on the stack.
When the stack item is a memory address, IDA attempts to resolve the address
to a function location (this helps highlight the location from which a func-
tion was called). When the stack item is a data pointer, a reference to the
associated data item is displayed. The remaining default displays include the
Hex view \, which offers a standard hex dump of memory, the Modules ]
view, which displays a list of modules currently loaded in the process image,
and the Threads ^ view, which displays a list of threads in the current pro-
cess. Double-clicking any listed thread causes the IDA View-EIP disassembly



5. See http://www.ollydbg.de/.
6. See http://www.immunityinc.com/products-immdbg.shtml.

                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition          T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   519
                          © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                   window to jump to the current instruction within the selected thread and
                   updates the General Registers view to reflect the current values for registers
                   within the selected thread.
                       The General Registers window (also shown in Figure 24-6) displays the
                   current contents of the CPU’s general-purpose registers. Additional windows
                   for displaying the contents of the CPU’s segment, floating-point, or MMX
                   registers may be opened from the Debugger menu.




                   Figure 24-6: The General Registers display

                        Within the General Registers window, register contents are displayed to
                   the right of the associated register name followed by a description of each
                   register’s content. The CPU flag bits are displayed down the rightmost col-
                   umn. Right-clicking a register value or flag bit provides access to a Modify
                   menu item, which allows you to change the contents of any register or CPU
                   flag. Menu options offer quick access to zero a value, toggle a value, incre-
                   ment a value, or decrement a value. Toggling values is particularly useful for
                   changing CPU flag bits. Right-clicking any register value also provides access
                   to the Open Register Window menu item. Selecting Open Register Window
                   causes IDA to open a new disassembly window centered at the memory loca-
                   tion held in the selected register. If you ever find that you have inadvertently
                   closed either IDA View-EIP or IDA View-ESP, use the Open Register Window
                   command on the appropriate register to reopen the lost window. If a register
                   appears to point to a valid memory location, then the right-angle arrow con-
                   trol to the right of that register’s value will be active and highlighted in black.
                   Clicking an active arrow opens a new disassembly view centered on the corre-
                   sponding memory location.
                        The Modules window displays a list of all executable files and shared
                   libraries loaded into the process memory space. Double-clicking any module
                   named in the list opens a list of symbols exported by that module. Figure 24-7
                   shows an example of the contents of kernel32.dll. The symbol list provides an
                   easy way to track down functions within loaded libraries if you wish to set
                   breakpoints on entry to those functions.




520   Chapter 24                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                          © 2011 by Chris Eagle
        Figure 24-7: The Modules window with associated module
        contents

             Additional debugger displays are accessible using various debugger
        menu selections. Displays pertaining to debugger operations will be discussed
        in the following section, “Process Control.” Along with the debugger-specific
        displays, all traditional IDA subviews, such as Functions and Segments, remain
        available via the Views Open Subviews command.

Process Control
        Perhaps the most important feature of any debugger is the ability to closely
        control—and modify, if desired—the behavior of the process being debugged.
        To that end, most debuggers offer commands that allow one or more instruc-
        tions to be executed before returning control to the debugger. Such com-
        mands are often used in conjunction with breakpoints that allow the user to
        specify that execution should be interrupted when a designated instruction
        is reached or when a specific condition is met.
             Basic execution of a process under debugger control is accomplished
        through the use of various Step, Continue, and Run commands. Because
        they are used so frequently, it is helpful to become familiar with the toolbar
        buttons and hotkey sequences associated with these commands. Figure 24-8
        shows the toolbar buttons associated with execution of a process.
           Continue Terminate                   Step Over Run to Cursor
             F9      CTRL-F2                        F8         F9




                 Pause                        Step Into Run Until Return
                                                 F7         CTRL-F7


        Figure 24-8: Debugger process control tools

             The behavior of each of these commands is described in the following list:

             Continue Resumes execution of a paused process. Execution continues
             until a breakpoint is hit, the user pauses or terminates execution, or the
             process terminates on its own.



                                The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition              T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   521
                                   © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                       Pause     Pauses a running process.
                       Terminate     Terminates a running process.
                       Step Into Executes the next instruction only. If the next instruction is a
                       function call, breaks on the first instruction of the target function. Hence
                       the name Step Into, since execution steps into any function being called.
                       Step Over Executes the next instruction only. If the next instruction is
                       a function call, treats the call as a single instruction, breaking once the
                       function returns. Hence the name Step Over, since stepping proceeds
                       over functions rather than through them as with Step Into. Execution
                       may be interrupted prior to completion of the function call if a break-
                       point is encountered. Step Over is very useful as a time-saver when the
                       behavior of a function is well known and uninteresting.
                       Run Until Return Resumes execution of the current function and does
                       not stop until that function returns (or a breakpoint is encountered).
                       This operation is useful when you have seen enough of a function and
                       you wish to get out of it or when you inadvertently step into a function
                       that you meant to step over.
                       Run to Cursor Resumes execution of the process and stops when exe-
                       cution reaches the current cursor location (or a breakpoint is hit). This
                       feature is useful for running through large blocks of code without the
                       need to set a permanent breakpoint at each location where you wish to
                       pause. Beware that the program may not pause if the cursor location is
                       bypassed or otherwise never reached.

                       In addition to toolbar and hotkey access, all of the execution control
                   commands are accessible via the Debugger menu. Regardless of whether a
                   process pauses after a single step or hitting a breakpoint, each time the pro-
                   cess pauses, all debugger-related displays are updated to reflect the state of
                   the process (CPU registers, flags, memory contents) at the time the process
                   was paused.

                   Breakpoints
                   Breakpoints are a debugger feature that goes hand in hand with process exe-
                   cution and interruption (pausing). Breakpoints are set as a means of inter-
                   rupting program execution at very specific locations within the program. In
                   a sense a breakpoint is a more permanent extension of the Run to Cursor
                   concept in that once a breakpoint is set at a given address, execution will
                   always be interrupted when execution reaches that location, regardless of
                   whether the cursor remains positioned on that location or not. However,
                   while there is only one cursor to which execution can run, it is possible to
                   set many breakpoints all over a program, the arrival at any one of which will




522   Chapter 24                      The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                         © 2011 by Chris Eagle
interrupt execution of the program. Breakpoints are set in IDA by navigating
to the location at which you want execution to pause and using the F2 hotkey
(or right-clicking and selecting Add Breakpoint). Addresses at which break-
points have been set are highlighted with a red (by default) band across the
entire disassembly line. A breakpoint may be removed by pressing F2 a sec-
ond time to toggle the breakpoint off. A complete list of breakpoints cur-
rently set within a program may be viewed via Debugger Breakpoints
Breakpoint List.
     By default, IDA utilizes software breakpoints, which are implemented by
replacing the opcode byte at the breakpoint address with a software break-
point instruction. For x86 binaries, this is the int 3 instruction, which uses
opcode value 0xCC. Under normal circumstances, when a software breakpoint
instruction is executed, the operating system transfers control to any debugger
that may be monitoring the interrupted process. As discussed in Chapter 21,
obfuscated code may take advantage of the behavior of software breakpoints
in an attempt to hinder normal operation of any attached debugger.
     As an alternative to software breakpoints, some CPUs (such as the x86,
actually 386, and later) offer support for hardware-assisted breakpoints. Hard-
ware breakpoints are typically configured through the use of dedicated CPU
registers. For x86 CPUs, these registers are called DR0–7 (debug registers 0
through 7). A maximum of four hardware breakpoints can be specified using
x86 registers DR0–3. The remaining x86 debug registers are used to specify
additional constraints on each breakpoint. When a hardware breakpoint is
enabled, there is no need to substitute a special instruction into the program
being debugged. Instead, the CPU itself decides whether execution should
be interrupted or not based on values contained within the debug registers.
     Once a breakpoint has been set, it is possible to modify various aspects of
its behavior. Beyond simply interrupting the process, debuggers often sup-
port the concept of conditional breakpoints, which allow users to specify a con-
dition that must be satisfied before the breakpoint is actually honored. When
such a breakpoint is reached and the associated condition is not satisfied, the
debugger automatically resumes execution of the program. The general idea
is that the condition is expected to be satisfied at some point in the future,
resulting in interruption of the program only when the condition you are
interested in has been satisfied.
     The IDA debugger supports both conditional and hardware breakpoints.
In order to modify the default (unconditional, software-based) behavior of
a breakpoint, you must edit a breakpoint after it has been set. In order to
access the breakpoint-editing dialog, you must right-click an existing break-
point and select Edit Breakpoint. Figure 24-9 shows the resulting Breakpoint
Settings dialog.




                  The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition             T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   523
                     © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                    Figure 24-9: The Breakpoint Settings dialog

                         The Location box indicates the address of the breakpoint being edited,
                    while the Enabled checkbox indicates whether the breakpoint is currently
                    active or not. A breakpoint that is disabled is not honored regardless of any
                    condition that may be associated with the breakpoint. The Hardware check-
                    box is used to request that the breakpoint be implemented in hardware
                    rather than software.

      WARNING       A word of caution concerning hardware breakpoints: Though the x86 only supports
                    four hardware breakpoints at any given time, as of this writing (IDA version 6.1), IDA
                    will happily allow you to designate more than four hardware breakpoints. However,
                    only four of them will be honored. Any additional hardware breakpoints will be
                    ignored.
                         When specifying a hardware breakpoint, you must use the Hardware
                    breakpoint mode radio buttons to specify whether the breakpoint behavior
                    is to break on execute, break on write, or break on read/write. The latter
                    two categories (break on write and break on read/write) allow you to create
                    breakpoints that trigger when a specific memory location (usually a data
                    location) is accessed, regardless of what instruction happens to be executing
                    at the time the access takes place. This is very useful if you are more inter-
                    ested in when your program accesses a piece of data than where the data is
                    accessed from.
                         In addition to specifying a mode for your hardware breakpoint, you must
                    specify a size. For execute breakpoints the size must be 1 byte. For write or
                    read/write breakpoints, the size may be set to 1, 2, or 4 bytes. When the size
                    is set to 2 bytes, the breakpoint’s address must be word aligned (a multiple
                    of 2 bytes). Similarly, for 4-byte breakpoints, the breakpoint address must be
                    double-word aligned (a multiple of 4 bytes). A hardware breakpoint’s size is
                    combined with its address to form a range of bytes over which the breakpoint
                    may be triggered. An example may help to explain. Consider a 4-byte write



524    Chapter 24                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                           © 2011 by Chris Eagle
breakpoint set at address 0804C834h. This breakpoint will be triggered by a
1-byte write to 0804C837h, a 2-byte write to 0804C836h, and a 4-byte write to
0804C832h, among others. In each of these cases, at least 1 byte in the range
0804C834h0804C837h is written. More information on the behavior of x86 hard-
ware breakpoints can be found in the Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
Developer’s Manual, Volume 3B: System Programming Guide, Part 2.7
      Conditional breakpoints are created by providing an expression in the
Breakpoint Settings dialog’s Condition field. Conditional breakpoints are a
debugger feature, not an instruction set or CPU feature. When a breakpoint
is triggered, it is the debugger’s job to evaluate any associated conditional
expression and determine whether the program should be paused (the con-
dition is met) or whether execution should simply continue (the condition is
not met). Therefore, conditions may be specified for both software and hard-
ware breakpoints.
      IDA breakpoint conditions are specified using IDC (not Python) expres-
sions. Expressions that evaluate to non-zero are considered true, satisfying
the breakpoint condition and triggering the breakpoint. Expressions that
evaluate to zero are considered false, failing to satisfy the breakpoint condi-
tion and failing to trigger the associated breakpoint. In order to assist in the
creation of breakpoint expressions, IDA makes special register variables avail-
able within IDC (again, not Python) to provide direct access to register con-
tents in breakpoint expressions. These variables are named after the registers
themselves and include EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, ESI, EDI, EBP, ESP, EFL, AX, BX, CX, DX, SI,
DI, BP, SP, AL, AH, BL, BH, CL, CH, DL, and DH. These register variables are accessible
only when the debugger is active.
      Unfortunately, no variables exist that allow direct access to the proc-
essor flag bits. In order to access individual CPU flags, you need to call the
GetRegValue function to obtain the value of the desired flag bit, such as CF.
If you need a reminder regarding valid register and flag names, refer to the
labels along the left and right edges of the General Registers window. A few
example breakpoint expressions are shown here:

EAX == 100                   // break if eax holds the value 100
ESI > EDI                    // break if esi is greater than edi
Dword(EBP-20) == 10          // Read current stack frame (var_20) and compare to 10
GetRegValue("ZF")            // break if zero flag is set
EAX = 1                      // Set EAX to 1, this also evaluates to true (non-zero)
EIP = 0x0804186C             // Change EIP, perhaps to bypass code

    Two things to note about breakpoint expressions are the fact that IDC
functions may be called to access process information (as long as the func-
tion returns a value) and the fact that assignment can be used as a means of
modifying register values at specific locations during process execution. Ilfak
himself demonstrated this technique as an example of overriding a function
return value.8

7. See http://www.intel.com/products/processor/manuals/.
8. See http://www.hexblog.com/2005/11/simple_trick_to_hide_ida_debug.html and http://www
.hexblog.com/2005/11/stealth_plugin_1.html.

                      The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition                     T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   525
                         © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                        The last breakpoint options that can be configured in the Breakpoint
                   Settings dialog are grouped into the Actions box on the right side of the dia-
                   log. The Break checkbox specifies whether program execution should actually
                   be paused (assuming any associated condition is true) when the breakpoint
                   is reached. It may seem unusual to create a breakpoint that doesn’t break,
                   but this is actually a useful feature if all you want to do is modify a specific
                   memory or register value each time an instruction is reached without requir-
                   ing the program to be paused at the same time. Selecting the Trace check-
                   box causes a trace event to be logged each time the breakpoint is hit.

                   Tracing
                   Tracing offers a means of logging specific events that occur while a process is
                   executing. Trace events are logged to a fixed-size trace buffer and may option-
                   ally be logged to a trace file. Two styles of tracing are available: instruction
                   tracing and function tracing. When instruction tracing is enabled (Debugger
                   Tracing Instruction Tracing), IDA records the address, the instruction, and
                   the values of any registers (other than EIP) that were changed by the instruc-
                   tion. Instruction tracing can slow down a debugged process considerably,
                   because the debugger must single-step the process in order to monitor and
                   record all register values. Function tracing (Debugger Tracing Function
                   Tracing) is a subset of instruction tracing in which only function calls (and
                   optionally returns) are logged. No register values are logged for function
                   trace events.
                        Three types of individual trace events are also available: write traces,
                   read/write traces, and execution traces. As their names imply, each allows
                   logging of a trace event when a specific action occurs at a designated address.
                   Each of these individual traces is implemented using nonbreaking breakpoints
                   with the trace option set. Write and read/write traces are implemented using
                   hardware breakpoints and thus fall under the same restrictions mentioned
                   previously for hardware breakpoints, the most significant being that no more
                   than four hardware-assisted breakpoints or traces may be active at any given
                   time. By default, execution traces are implemented using software break-
                   points, and thus there is no limit on the number of execution traces that can
                   be set within a program.
                        Figure 24-10 shows the Tracing Options (Debugger Tracing Tracing
                   Options) dialog used to configure the debugger’s tracing operations.
                        Options specified here apply to function and instruction tracing only.
                   These options have no effect on individual trace events. The Trace buffer
                   size option specifies the maximum number of trace events that may be dis-
                   played at any given time. For a given buffer size n, only the n most recent
                   trace events are displayed. Naming a log file causes all trace events to be
                   appended to the named file. A file dialog is not offered when specifying a
                   log file, so you must specify the complete path to the log file yourself. An IDC
                   expression may be entered as a stop condition. The condition is evaluated
                   prior to tracing through each instruction. If the condition evaluates to true,
                   execution is immediately paused. The effect of this expression is to act as a
                   conditional breakpoint that is not tied to any specific location.

526   Chapter 24                     The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                        © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                 Figure 24-10: The Tracing Options dialog

                      The Mark consecutive traced events with same IP option, when checked,
                 causes consecutive trace events originating from the same instruction (IP
                 here means Instruction Pointer) to be flagged with an equal sign. An example
                 in which consecutive events can originate at the same instruction address
                 occurs when the REP9 prefix is used in x86 programs. In order for an instruc-
                 tion trace to show each repetition at the same instruction address, the Log
                 if same IP option must also be selected. Without this option selected, an
                 instruction prefixed with REP is listed only once each time it is encountered.
                 The following listing shows a partial instruction trace using the default trace
                 settings:

                Thread Address               Instruction               Result
                ------ -------               -----------               ------
              X 00000150 .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb                 ECX=00000000 ESI=0022FE2C EDI=0022FCF4
                00000150 .text:sub_401320+19 pop esi                   ESI=00000000 ESP=0022FCE4

                     Note that the movsb instruction X is listed only once.
                     In the following listing, Log if same IP has been selected, resulting in
                 each iteration of the rep loop being logged:

Thread Address               Instruction       Result
------ -------               -----------       ------
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=0000000B ESI=0022FE21 EDI=0022FCE9 EFL=00010206 RF=1
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=0000000A ESI=0022FE22 EDI=0022FCEA
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=00000009 ESI=0022FE23 EDI=0022FCEB
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=00000008 ESI=0022FE24 EDI=0022FCEC
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=00000007 ESI=0022FE25 EDI=0022FCED
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=00000006 ESI=0022FE26 EDI=0022FCEE
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=00000005 ESI=0022FE27 EDI=0022FCEF
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=00000004 ESI=0022FE28 EDI=0022FCF0
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb         ECX=00000003 ESI=0022FE29 EDI=0022FCF1


                 9. The REP prefix is an instruction modifier that causes certain x86 string instructions such as
                 movs and scas to be repeated based on a count contained in the ECX register.


                                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition                        T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   527
                                          © 2011 by Chris Eagle
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb       ECX=00000002 ESI=0022FE2A EDI=0022FCF2
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb       ECX=00000001 ESI=0022FE2B EDI=0022FCF3
000012AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb       ECX=00000000 ESI=0022FE2C EDI=0022FCF4 EFL=00000206 RF=0
000012AC .text:sub_401320+19 pop esi         ESI=00000000 ESP=0022FCE4

                       Finally, in the following listing, the Mark consecutive traced events with
                   same IP option has been enabled, resulting in special markings that high-
                   light the fact that the instruction pointer has not changed from one instruc-
                   tion to the next:

Thread Address               Instruction    Result
------ -------               -----------    ------
000017AC .text:sub_401320+17 rep movsb      ECX=0000000B ESI=0022FE21 EDI=0022FCE9 EFL=00010206 RF=1
=        =                   =              ECX=0000000A ESI=0022FE22 EDI=0022FCEA
=        =                   =              ECX=00000009 ESI=0022FE23 EDI=0022FCEB
=        =                   =              ECX=00000008 ESI=0022FE24 EDI=0022FCEC
=        =                   =              ECX=00000007 ESI=0022FE25 EDI=0022FCED
=        =                   =              ECX=00000006 ESI=0022FE26 EDI=0022FCEE
=        =                   =              ECX=00000005 ESI=0022FE27 EDI=0022FCEF
=        =                   =              ECX=00000004 ESI=0022FE28 EDI=0022FCF0
=        =                   =              ECX=00000003 ESI=0022FE29 EDI=0022FCF1
=        =                   =              ECX=00000002 ESI=0022FE2A EDI=0022FCF2
=        =                   =              ECX=00000001 ESI=0022FE2B EDI=0022FCF3
=        =                   =              ECX=00000000 ESI=0022FE2C EDI=0022FCF4 EFL=00000206 RF=0
000017AC .text:sub_401320+19 pop esi        ESI=00000000 ESP=0022FCE4

                        The last two options we will mention concerning tracing are Trace over
                   debugger segments and Trace over library functions. When Trace over debug-
                   ger segments is selected, instruction and function call tracing is temporarily
                   disabled anytime execution proceeds to a program segment outside any of
                   the file segments originally loaded into IDA. The most common example of
                   this is a call to a shared library function. Selecting Trace over library func-
                   tions temporarily disables function and instruction tracing anytime execu-
                   tion enters a function that IDA has identified as a library function (perhaps
                   via FLIRT signature matching). Library functions linked into a binary should
                   not be confused with library functions that a binary accesses via a shared library
                   file such as a DLL. Both of these options are enabled by default, resulting in
                   better performance while tracing (because the debugger does not need to
                   step into library code) as well as a substantial reduction in the number of
                   trace events generated, since instruction traces through library code can
                   rapidly fill the trace buffer.

                   Stack Traces
                   A stack trace is a display of the current call stack, or sequence of function calls
                   that have been made in order for execution to reach a particular location
                   within a binary. Figure 24-11 shows a sample stack trace generated using the
                   Debugger Stack Trace command.




528   Chapter 24                      The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                         © 2011 by Chris Eagle
Figure 24-11: A sample stack trace

     The top line in a stack trace lists the name of the function currently exe-
cuting. The second line indicates the function that called the current func-
tion and the address from which that call was made. Successive lines indicate
the point from which each function was called. A debugger is able to create a
stack trace display by walking the stack and parsing each stack frame that it
encounters, and it typically relies on the contents of the frame pointer regis-
ter (EBP for x86) to locate the base of each stack frame. When a stack frame
is located, the debugger can extract a pointer to the next stack frame (the
saved frame pointer) as well as the saved return address, which is used to
locate the call instruction used to invoke the current function. IDA’s debug-
ger cannot trace through stack frames that do not utilize EBP as a frame
pointer. At the function (rather than individual instruction) level, stack
traces are useful for answering the question, “How did I get here?” or, more
correctly, “What sequence of function calls led to this particular location?”

Watches
While debugging a process, you may wish to constantly monitor the value
contained in one or more variables. Rather than requiring you to navigate
to the desired memory locations each time the process is paused, many debug-
gers allow you to specify lists of memory locations whose values should be dis-
played each time the process is stopped in the debugger. Such lists are called
watch lists, because they allow you to watch as the contents of designated
memory locations change during program execution. Watch lists are simply
a navigational convenience; they do not cause execution to pause like a
breakpoint.
     Because they are focused on data, watch points (addresses designated
to be watched) are most commonly set in the stack, heap, or data sections
of a binary. Watches are set in the IDA debugger by right-clicking a memory
item of interest and selecting Add Watch. Determining exactly which address
to set a watch on may require some thought. Determining the address of a
global variable is somewhat less challenging than determining the address
of a local variable because global variables are allocated and assigned fixed
addresses at compile time. Local variables, on the other hand, don’t exist
until runtime, and even then they exist only once the function in which they
are declared has been called. With the debugger active, once you have
stepped into a function, IDA is capable of reporting the addresses of local
variables within that function. Figure 24-12 shows the result of mousing over
a local variable named arg_0 (actually a parameter passed into the function).

                    The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition           T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   529
                       © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                    Figure 24-12: Debugger resolution of a local variable address

                         Double-clicking a local variable within an active function causes IDA to
                    jump the main IDA View window to the address of that local variable. Having
                    arrived at the variable’s address, you may then add a watch on that address
                    using the Add Watch context-sensitive menu option, though you will need
                    to manually enter the address into the Watch Address dialog. If, instead,
                    you take the time to name the memory location, IDA will automatically add
                    a watch if you apply the same menu option to the name rather than the
                    address.
                         You can access a list of all watches currently in effect via Debugger
                    Watches Watch List. You can delete individual watches by highlighting the
                    desired watch in the watch list and pressing DELETE.

      Automating Debugger Tasks
                    In Chapters 15 through 19, we covered the basics of IDA scripting and the
                    IDA SDK and demonstrated the usefulness of these capabilities during static
                    analysis of binaries. Launching a process and working in the more dynamic
                    environment of a debugger doesn’t make scripting and plug-ins any less
                    useful. Interesting uses for the automation provided by scripts and plug-ins
                    include analyzing runtime data available while a process is being debugged,
                    implementing complex breakpoint conditions, and implementing measures
                    to subvert anti-debugging techniques.

                    Scripting Debugger Actions
                    All of the IDA scripting capabilities discussed in Chapter 15 continue to be
                    accessible when you are using the IDA debugger. Scripts may be launched
                    from the File menu, associated with hotkeys, and invoked from the IDA
                    scripting command line. In addition, user-created IDC functions may be ref-
                    erenced from breakpoint conditions and tracing termination expressions.
                          Basic scripting functions offer the capability to set, modify, and enumer-
                    ate breakpoints and the ability to read and write register and memory values.
                    Memory access is provided by the DbgByte, PatchDbgByte, DbgWord, PatchDbgWord,
                    DbgDword, and PatchDbgDword functions (analogous to the Byte, Word, Dword, and
                    PatchXXX functions described in Chapter 15). Register and breakpoint manip-
                    ulation is made possible by the following functions (please see the IDA help
                    file for a complete list).
                    long GetRegValue(string reg)
                        Returns the value of the named register, such as EAX, as discussed previ-
                        ously. In IDC only, register values may also be easily accessed by using
                        the desired register’s name as a variable within an IDC expression.

530    Chapter 24                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                           © 2011 by Chris Eagle
bool SetRegValue(number val, string name)
    Sets the value of the named register, such as EAX. If you are using IDC,
    register values may also be modified directly by using the desired register
    name on the left side of an assignment statement.
bool AddBpt(long addr)
    Adds a software breakpoint at the indicated address.
bool AddBptEx(long addr, long size, long type)
    Adds a breakpoint of the specified size and type at the indicated address.
    Type should be one of the BPT_xxx constants described in idc.idc or the
    IDA help file.
bool DelBpt(long addr)
    Deletes a breakpoint at the specified address.
long GetBptQty()
    Returns the number of breakpoints set within a program.
long GetBptEA(long bpt_num)
    Returns the address at which the indicated breakpoint is set.
long/string GetBptAttr(long addr, number attr)
    Returns an attribute associated with the breakpoint at the indicated
    address. The return value may be a number or a string depending on
    which attribute value has been requested. Attributes are specified using
    one of the BPTATTR_xxx values described in idc.idc or the IDA help file.
bool SetBptAttr(long addr, number attr, long value)
    Sets the specified attribute of the specified breakpoint to the specified
    value. Do not use this function to set breakpoint condition expressions
    (use SetBptCnd instead).
bool SetBptCnd(long addr, string cond)
    Sets the breakpoint condition to the provided conditional expression,
    which must be a valid IDC expression.
long CheckBpt(long addr)
    Gets the breakpoint status at the specified address. Return values indi-
    cate whether there is no breakpoint, the breakpoint is disabled, the
    breakpoint is enabled, or the breakpoint is active. An active breakpoint
    is a breakpoint that is enabled while the debugger is also active.
   The following script demonstrates how to install a custom IDC breakpoint-
handling function at the current cursor location:

#include <idc.idc>
/*
  * The following should return 1 to break, and 0 to continue execution.
  */
static my_breakpoint_condition() {
     return AskYN(1, "my_breakpoint_condition activated, break now?") == 1;
}


                   The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition            T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   531
                      © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                   /*
                     * This function is required to register my_breakpoint_condition
                     * as a breakpoint conditional expression
                     */
                   static main() {
                        auto addr;
                        addr = ScreenEA();
                        AddBpt(addr);
                        SetBptCnd(addr, "my_breakpoint_condition()");
                   }

                       The complexity of my_breakpoint_condition is entirely up to you. In this
                   example, each time the breakpoint is hit, a dialog will be displayed asking the
                   user if she would like to continue execution of the process or pause at the
                   current location. The value returned by my_breakpoint_condition is used by
                   the debugger to determine whether the breakpoint should be honored or
                   ignored.
                       Programmatic control of the debugger is possible from both the SDK
                   and through the use of scripts. Within the SDK, IDA utilizes an event-driven
                   model and provides callback notifications to plug-ins when specific debugger
                   events occur. Unfortunately, IDA’s scripting capabilities don’t facilitate the
                   use of an event-driven paradigm within scripts. As a result, Hex-Rays intro-
                   duced a number of scripting functions that allow for synchronous control of
                   the debugger from within scripts. The basic approach required to drive the
                   debugger using a script is to initiate a debugger action and then wait for the
                   corresponding debugger event code. Keep in mind that a call to a synchro-
                   nous debugger function (which is all you can do in a script) blocks all other
                   IDA operations until the call completes. The following list details several of
                   the debugging extensions available for scripts:
                   long GetDebuggerEvent(long wait_evt, long timeout)
                       Waits for a debugger event (as specified by wait_evt) to take place within
                       the specified number of seconds (–1 waits forever). Returns an event type
                       code that indicates the type of event that was received. Specify wait_evt
                       using a combination of one or more WFNE_xxx (WFNE stands for Wait For
                       Next Event) flags. Possible return values are documented in the IDA
                       help file.
                   bool RunTo(long addr)
                       Runs the process until the specified location is reached or until a break-
                       point is hit.
                   bool StepInto()
                       Steps the process one instruction, stepping into any function calls.
                   bool StepOver()
                       Steps the process one instruction, stepping over any function calls. This
                       call may terminate early if a breakpoint is hit.
                   bool StepUntilRet()
                       Runs until the current function call returns or until a breakpoint is hit.


532   Chapter 24                     The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                        © 2011 by Chris Eagle
bool EnableTracing(long trace_level, long enable)
     Enables (or disables) the generation of trace events. The trace_level
     parameter should be set to one of the TRACE_xxx constants defined in
     idc.idc.
long GetEventXXX()
     A number of functions are available for retrieving information related to
     the current debug event. Some of these functions are valid only for spe-
     cific event types. You should test the return value of GetDebuggerEvent in
     order to make sure that a particular GetEventXXX function is valid.
    GetDebuggerEvent must be called after each function that causes the pro-
cess to execute in order to retrieve the debugger’s event code. Failure to do
so may prevent follow-up attempts to step or run the process. For example,
the following code fragment will step the debugger only one time because
GetDebuggerEvent does not get called to clear the last event type in between
invocations of StepOver.

StepOver();
StepOver();       //this and all subsequent calls will fail
StepOver();
StepOver();

    The proper way to perform an execution action is to follow up each call
with a call to GetDebuggerEvent, as shown in the following example:

StepOver();
GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_SUSP, -1);
StepOver();
GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_SUSP, -1);
StepOver();
GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_SUSP, -1);
StepOver();
GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_SUSP, -1);

    The calls to GetDebuggerEvent allow execution to continue even if you
choose to ignore the return value from GetDebuggerEvent. The event type
WFNE_SUSP indicates that we wish to wait for an event that results in suspension
of the debugged process, such as an exception or a breakpoint. You may
have noticed that there is no function that simply resumes execution of a sus-
pended process.10 However, it is possible to achieve the same effect by using
the WFNE_CONT flag in a call to GetDebuggerEvent, as shown here:

GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_SUSP | WFNE_CONT, -1);

    This particular call waits for the next available suspend event after first
resuming execution by continuing the process from the current instruction.


10. In reality, there is a macro named ResumeProcess that is defined as
GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_CONT|WFNE_NOWAIT, 0).


                      The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition                       T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   533
                         © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                          Additional functions are provided for automatically launching the
                     debugger and attaching to running processes. See IDA’s help file for more
                     information on these functions.
                          An example of a simple debugger script for collecting statistics on the
                     addresses of each executed instruction (provided the debugger is enabled)
                     is shown here:

                     static main() {
                        auto ca, code, addr, count, idx;
                   X    ca = GetArrayId("stats");
                        if (ca != -1) {
                           DeleteArray(ca);
                        }
                        ca = CreateArray("stats");
                   Y    EnableTracing(TRACE_STEP, 1);
                   Z    for (code = GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_ANY | WFNE_CONT, -1); code > 0;
                               code = GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_ANY | WFNE_CONT, -1)) {
                   [       addr = GetEventEa();
                   \       count = GetArrayElement(AR_LONG, ca, addr) + 1;
                   ]       SetArrayLong(ca, addr, count);
                        }
                        EnableTracing(TRACE_STEP, 0);
                   ^    for (idx = GetFirstIndex(AR_LONG, ca);
                               idx != BADADDR;
                               idx = GetNextIndex(AR_LONG, ca, idx)) {
                           count = GetArrayElement(AR_LONG, ca, idx);
                           Message("%x: %d\n", idx, count);
                        }
                   _    DeleteArray(ca);
                     }

                          The script begins X by testing for the presence of a global array named
                     stats. If one is found, the array is removed and re-created so that we can start
                     with an empty array. Next Y, single-step tracing is enabled before entering a
                     loop Z to drive the single-stepping process. Each time a debug event is gen-
                     erated, the address of the associated event is retrieved [, the current count
                     for the associated address is retrieved from the global array and incremented
                     \, and the array is updated with the new count ]. Note that the instruction
                     pointer is used as the index into the sparse global array, which saves time look-
                     ing up the address in some other form of data structure. Once the process
                     completes, a second loop ^ is used to retrieve and print all values from array
                     locations that have valid values. In this case, the only array indexes that will
                     have valid values represent addresses from which instructions were fetched.
                     The script finishes off _ by deleting the global array that was used to gather
                     the statistics. Example output from this script is shown here:

                     401028: 1
                     40102b: 1
                     40102e: 2




534   Chapter 24                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                          © 2011 by Chris Eagle
    401031: 2
    401034: 2
    401036: 1
    40103b: 1

         A slight alteration of the preceding example can be used to gather statis-
    tics on what types of instructions are executed during the lifetime of a pro-
    cess. The following example shows the modifications required in the first
    loop to gather instruction-type data rather than address data:

       for (code = GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_ANY | WFNE_CONT, -1); code > 0;
            code = GetDebuggerEvent(WFNE_ANY | WFNE_CONT, -1)) {
          addr = GetEventEa();
X         mnem = GetMnem(addr);
Y         count = GetHashLong(ht, mnem) + 1;
Z         SetHashLong(ht, mnem, count);
       }

         Rather than attempting to classify individual opcodes, we choose to
    group instructions by mnemonics X. Because mnemonics are strings, we
    make use of the hash-table feature of global arrays to retrieve the current
    count associated with a given mnemonic Y and save the updated count Z
    back into the correct hash table entry. Sample output from this modified
    script is shown here:

    add:   18
    and:   2
    call: 46
    cmp:   16
    dec:   1
    imul: 2
    jge:   2
    jmp:   5
    jnz:   7
    js:    1
    jz:    5
    lea:   4
    mov:   56
    pop:   25
    push: 59
    retn: 19
    sar:   2
    setnz: 3
    test: 3
    xor:   7

         In Chapter 25 we will revisit the use of debugger-interaction capabilities
    as a means to assist in de-obfuscating binaries.




                      The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition             T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   535
                         © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                     Automating Debugger Actions with IDA Plug-ins
                     In Chapter 16 you learned that IDA’s SDK offers significant power for devel-
                     oping a variety of compiled extensions that can be integrated into IDA and
                     that have complete access to the IDA API. The IDA API offers a superset of
                     all the capabilities available in IDC, and the debugging extensions are no
                     exception. Debugger extensions to the API are declared in <SDKDIR>/
                     dbg.hpp and include C++ counterparts to all of the IDC functions discussed
                     thus far, along with a complete asynchronous debugger interface capability.
                          For asynchronous interaction, plug-ins gain access to debugger notifica-
                     tions by hooking the HT_DBG notification type (see loader.hpp). Debugger noti-
                     fications are declared in the dbg_notification_t enum found in dbg.hpp.
                          Within the debugger API, commands for interacting with the debugger
                     are typically defined in pairs, with one function used for synchronous inter-
                     action (as with scripts) and the second function used for asynchronous inter-
                     action. Generically, the synchronous form of a function is named COMMAND(),
                     and its asynchronous counterpart is named request_COMMAND(). The request_XXX
                     versions are used to queue debugger actions for later processing. Once you
                     finish queuing asynchronous requests, you must invoke the run_requests func-
                     tion to initiate processing of your request queue. As your requests are pro-
                     cessed, debugger notifications will be delivered to any callback functions that
                     you may have registered via hook_to_notification_point.
                          Using asynchronous notifications, we can develop an asynchronous ver-
                     sion of the address-counting script from the previous section. The first task is
                     to make sure that we hook and unhook debugger notifications. We will do
                     this in the plug-in’s init and term methods, as shown here:

                     //A netnode to gather stats into
                     X netnode stats("$ stats", 0, true);

                     int idaapi init(void) {
                        hook_to_notification_point(HT_DBG, dbg_hook, NULL);
                        return PLUGIN_KEEP;
                     }

                     void idaapi term(void) {
                        unhook_from_notification_point(HT_DBG, dbg_hook, NULL);
                     }

                          Note that we have also elected to declare a global netnode X, which we
                     will use to collect statistics. Next we consider what we want the plug-in to do
                     when it is activated via its assigned hotkey. Our example plug-in run function
                     is shown here:

                     void idaapi run(int arg) {
                        stats.altdel();   //clear any existing stats
                   X    request_enable_step_trace();
                   Y    request_step_until_ret();
                   Z    run_requests();
                     }


536   Chapter 24                       The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                          © 2011 by Chris Eagle
       Since we are using asynchronous techniques in this example, we must
  first submit a request to enable step tracing X and then submit a request to
  resume execution of the process being debugged. For the sake of simplicity,
  we will gather statistics on the current function only, so we will issue a request
  to run until the current function returns Y. With our requests properly
  queued, we kick things off by invoking run_requests to process the current
  request queue Z.
       All that remains is to process the notifications that we expect to receive
  by creating our HT_DBG callback function. A simple callback that processes
  only two messages is shown here:

  int idaapi dbg_hook(void *user_data, int notification_code, va_list va) {
     switch (notification_code) {
X       case dbg_trace: //notification arguments are detailed in dbg.hpp
           va_arg(va, thid_t);
Y          ea_t ea = va_arg(va, ea_t);
           //increment the count for this address
Z          stats.altset(ea, stats.altval(ea) + 1);
           return 0;
[       case dbg_step_until_ret:
           //print results
\          for (nodeidx_t i = stats.alt1st(); i != BADNODE; i = stats.altnxt(i)) {
               msg("%x: %d\n", i, stats.altval(i));
           }
           //delete the netnode and stop tracing
]          stats.kill();
^          request_disable_step_trace();
_          run_requests();
           break;
     }
  }

       The dbg_trace notification X will be received for each instruction that
  executes until we turn tracing off. When a trace notification is received, the
  address of the trace point is retrieved from the args list Y and then used to
  update the appropriate netnode array index Z. The dbg_step_until_ret notifi-
  cation [ is sent once the process hits the return statement to leave the func-
  tion in which we started. This notification is our signal that we should stop
  tracing and print any statistics we have gathered. A loop is used \ to iterate
  through all valid index values of the stats netnode before destroying the net-
  node ] and requesting that step tracing be disabled ^. Since this example
  uses asynchronous commands, the request to disable tracing is added to the
  queue, which means we have to issue run_requests _ in order for the queue to
  be processed. An important warning about synchronous versus asynchronous
  interaction with the debugger is that you should never call the synchronous
  version of a function while actively processing an asynchronous notification
  message.
       Synchronous interaction with the debugger using the SDK is done in
  a manner very similar to scripting the debugger. As with many of the SDK
  functions we have seen in previous chapters, the names of debugger-related

                     The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition               T h e I D A D e b u g ge r   537
                        © 2011 by Chris Eagle
                   functions typically do not match the names of related scripting functions, so
                   you may need to spend some time combing through dbg.hpp in order to find
                   the functions you are looking for. The biggest disparity in names between
                   scripting and the SDK is the SDK’s version of GetDebuggerEvent, which is called
                   wait_for_next_event in the SDK. The other major difference between script
                   functions and the SDK is that variables corresponding to the CPU registers
                   are not automatically declared for you within the SDK. In order to access the
                   values of CPU registers from the SDK, you must use the get_reg_val and
                   set_reg_val functions to read and write registers, respectively.


      Summary
                   IDA may not have the largest share of the debugger market, but its debugger
                   is powerful and integrates seamlessly with the disassembly side of IDA. While
                   the debugger’s user interface, like that of any debugger, requires some initial
                   getting used to, it offers all of the fundamental features that users require in a
                   basic debugger. Strong points include scripting and plug-in capabilities along
                   with the familiar user interface of IDA’s disassembly displays and the power of
                   its analysis capabilities. Together the unified disassembler/debugger combi-
                   nation provides a solid tool for performing static analysis, dynamic analysis,
                   or a combination of both.




538   Chapter 24                     The IDA Pro Book, 2nd Edition
                                        © 2011 by Chris Eagle
