webbots2e.book Page 15 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                                  IDEAS FOR WEBBOT PROJECTS




                                               It’s often more difficult to find applications
                                              for new technology than it is to learn the
                                            technology itself. Therefore, this chapter
                                        focuses on encouraging you to generate ideas for
                              things that you can do with webbots. We’ll explore how webbots capitalize on
                              browser limitations, and we’ll see a few examples of what people are currently
                              doing with webbots. We’ll wrap up by throwing out some wild ideas that might
                              help you expand your expectations of what can be done online.

             Inspiration from Browser Limitations
                              A useful method for generating ideas for webbot projects is to study what
                              cannot be done by simply pointing a browser at a typical website. You know
                              that browsers, used in traditional ways, cannot automate your Internet
                              experience. For example, they have these limitations:
                                   Browsers cannot aggregate and filter information for relevance.
                                   Browsers cannot interpret what they find online.
                                   Browsers cannot act on your behalf.
webbots2e.book Page 16 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                                   However, a browser may leverage the power of a webbot to do many things
                              that it could not do alone. Let’s look at some real-life examples of how browser
                              limitations were leveraged into actual webbot projects.

                              Webbots That Aggregate and Filter Information for Relevance
                              TrackRates.com (http://www.trackrates.com, shown in Figure 2-1) is a website
                              that deploys an army of webbots to aggregate and filter hotel room prices
                              from travel websites. By identifying room prices for specific hotels for specific
                              dates, it determines the actual market value for rooms up to three months
                              into the future. This information helps hotel managers intelligently price
                              rooms by specifically knowing what the competition is charging for similar
                              rooms. TrackRates.com also reveals market trends by performing statistical
                              analysis on room prices, and it tries to determine periods of high demand by
                              indicating dates on which hotels have booked all of their rooms.




                              Figure 2-1: TrackRates.com

                                  I wrote TrackRates.com to help hotel managers analyze local markets
                              and provide facts for setting room prices. Without the TrackRates.com webbot,
                              hotel managers either need to guess what their rooms are worth, rely on less
                              current information about their local hotel market, or go through the arduous
                              task of manually collecting this data.




       16     Chapter 2
webbots2e.book Page 17 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              Webbots That Interpret What They Find Online
                              WebSiteOptimization.com (http://www.websiteoptimization.com) uses a webbot
                              to help web developers create websites that use resources effectively. This
                              webbot accepts a web page’s URL (as shown in Figure 2-2) and analyzes how
                              each graphic, CSS, and JavaScript file is used by the web page. In the interest
                              of full disclosure, I should mention that I wrote the backend for this web
                              page analyzer.




       Figure 2-2: A website-analyzing webbot

                                  The WebSiteOptimization.com webbot analyzes the data it collects and
                              offers suggestions for optimizing website performance. Without this tool,
                              developers would have to manually parse through their HTML code to
                              determine which files are required by web pages, how much bandwidth they
                              are using, and how the organization of the web page affects its performance.

                              Webbots That Act on Your Behalf
                              Pokerbots, webbots that play online poker, are a response to the recent growth
                              in online gambling sites, particularly gaming sites with live poker rooms.
                              While the action in these pokers sites is live, not all the players are. Some
                              online poker players are webbots, like Poker Robot, shown in Figure 2-3.
                                  Webbots designed to play online poker not only know the rules of Texas
                              hold ’em but use predetermined business rules to expertly read how others
                              play. They use this information to hold, fold, or bet appropriately. Reportedly,
                              these automated players can very effectively pick the pockets of new and
                              inexperienced poker players. Some collusion webbots even allow one virtual



                                                                                      Ideas for Webbot Projects   17
webbots2e.book Page 18 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              player to play multiple hands at the same table, while making it look like a sepa-
                              rate person is playing each hand. Imagine playing against a group of people who
                              not only know each other’s cards, but hold, fold, and bet against you as a team!




       Figure 2-3: An example pokerbot

                                  Obviously, such webbots that play expert poker (and cheat) provide a
                              tremendous advantage. Nobody knows exactly how prevalent pokerbots
                              are, but they have created a market for anti-pokerbot software.

             A Few Crazy Ideas to Get You Started
                              One of the goals of this book is to encourage you to write new and experi-
                              mental webbots of your own design. A way to jumpstart this process is to
                              brainstorm and generate some ideas for potential projects. I’ve taken this
                              opportunity to list a few ideas to get you started. These ideas are not here
                              necessarily because they have commercial value. Instead, they should act as
                              inspiration for your own webbots and what you want to accomplish online.
                                  When designing a webbot, remember that the more specifically you can
                              define the task, the more useful your webbot will be. What can you do with a
                              webbot? Let’s look at a few scenarios.

                              Help Out a Busy Executive
                              Suppose you’re a busy executive type and you like to start your day reading
                              your online industry publication. Time is limited, however, and you only let
                              yourself read industry news until you’ve finished your first cup of coffee.
                              Therefore, you don’t want to be bothered with stories that you’ve read before
                              or that you know are not relevant to your business. You ask your developer




       18     Chapter 2
webbots2e.book Page 19 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              to create a specialized webbot that consolidates articles from your favorite
                              industry news sources and only displays links to stories that it has not shown
                              you before.
                                  The webbot could ignore articles that contain certain key phrases you
                              previously entered in an exclusion list 1 and highlight articles that contain
                              references to you or your competitors. With such an application, you could
                              quickly scan what’s happening in your industry and only spend time reading
                              relevant articles. You might even have more time to enjoy your coffee.

                              Save Money by Automating Tasks
                              It’s possible to design a webbot that automatically buys inventory for a store,
                              given a predetermined set of buying criteria. For example, assume you own a
                              store that sells used travel gear. Some of your sources for inventory are online
                              auction websites.2 Say you are interested in bidding on under-priced Tumi
                              suitcases during the closing minute of their auctions. If you don’t use a webbot
                              of some sort, you will have to use a web browser to check each auction site
                              periodically.
                                   Without a webbot, it can be expensive to use the Internet in a business
                              setting, because repetitive tasks (like procuring inventory) are time consum-
                              ing without automation. Additionally, the more mundane the task, the greater
                              the opportunity for human error. Checking online auctions for products to
                              resell could easily consume one or two hours a day—up to 25 percent of a
                              40-hour work week. At that rate, someone with an annual salary of $80,000
                              would cost a company $20,000 a year to procure inventory (without a webbot).
                              That cost does not include the cost of opportunities lost while the employee
                              manually monitors auction sites. In scenarios like this, it’s easy to see how prod-
                              uct acquisition with a webbot saves a lot of money—even for a small business
                              with small requirements. Additionally, a webbot may uncover bargains missed
                              by someone manually searching the auction site.

                              Protect Intellectual Property
                              You can write a webbot to protect your online intellectual property. For
                              example, suppose you spent many hours writing a JavaScript program. It has
                              commercial value, and you license the script for others to use for a fee. You’ve
                              been selling the program for a few months and have learned that some people
                              are downloading and using your program without paying for it. You write a
                              webbot to find websites that are using your JavaScript program without your
                              permission. This webbot searches the Internet and makes a list of URLs that
                              reference your JavaScript file. In a separate step, the webbot does a whois
                              lookup on the domain to determine the owner from the domain registrar.3

                              1
                                  An exclusion list is a list of keywords or phrases that are ignored by a webbot.
                              2
                                Some online auctions actually provide to1ols to help you write webbots that manage auctions.
                              If you’re interested in automating online auctions, check out eBay’s Developers Program
                              (http://developer.ebay.com).
                              3
                               whois is a service that returns information about the owner of a website. You can do the
                              equivalent of a whois from a shell script or from an online service.

                                                                                                       Ideas for Webbot Projects   19
webbots2e.book Page 20 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              If the domain is not one of your registered users, the webbot compiles contact
                              information from the domain registrar so you can contact the parties who
                              are using unlicensed copies of your code.

                              Monitor Opportunities
                              You can also write webbots that alert you when particular opportunities arise.
                              For example, let’s say that you have an interest in acquiring a Jack Russell
                              Terrier.4 Instead of devoting part of each day to searching for your new dog,
                              you decide to write a webbot to search for you and notify you when it finds a
                              dog meeting your requirements. Your webbot performs a daily search of the
                              websites of local animal shelters and dog rescue organizations. It parses the
                              contents of the sites, looking for your dog. When the webbot finds a Jack
                              Russell Terrier, it sends you an email notification describing the dog and its
                              location. The webbot also records this specific dog in its database, so it doesn’t
                              send additional notifications for the same dog in the future. This is a fairly
                              common webbot task, which could be modified to automatically discover job
                              listings, sports scores, or any other timely information.

                              Verify Access Rights on a Website
                              Webbots may prevent the potentially nightmarish situation that exists for any
                              web developer who mistakenly gives one user access to another user’s data.
                              To avoid this situation, you could commission a webbot to verify that all users
                              receive the correct access to your site. This webbot logs in to the site with
                              every viable username and password. While acting on each user’s behalf, the
                              webbot accesses every available page and compares those pages to a list of
                              appropriate pages for each user. If the webbot finds a user is inadvertently
                              able to access something he or she shouldn’t, that account is temporarily
                              suspended until the problem is fixed. Every morning before you arrive at
                              your office, the webbot emails a report of any irregularities it found the
                              night before.

                              Create an Online Clipping Service
                              Suppose you’re very vain, and you’d like a webbot to send an email to your
                              mother every time a major news service mentions your name. However, since
                              you’re not vain enough to check all the main news websites on a regular
                              basis, you write a webbot that accomplishes the task for you. This webbot
                              accesses a collection of websites, including CNN, Forbes, and Fortune.
                              You design your webbot to look only for articles that mention your name, and
                              you employ an exclusion list to ignore all articles that contain words or phrases
                              like shakedown, corruption, or money laundering. When the webbot finds an
                              appropriate article, it automatically sends your mother an email with a link to
                              the article. Your webbot also blind copies you on all emails it sends so you
                              know what she’s talking about when she calls.


                              4
                                  I actually met my dog online.

       20     Chapter 2
webbots2e.book Page 21 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              Plot Unauthorized Wi-Fi Networks
                              You could write a webbot that aids in maintaining network security on a large
                              corporate campus. For example, suppose that you recently discovered that
                              you have a problem with employees attaching unauthorized wireless access
                              points to your network. Since these unauthorized access points occur inside
                              your firewalls and proxies, you recognize that these unauthorized Wi-Fi net-
                              works pose a security risk that you need to control. Therefore, in addition to
                              a new security policy, you decide to create a webbot that automatically finds
                              and records the location of all wireless networks on your corporate campus.
                                   You notice that your mail room uses a small metal cart to deliver mail.
                              Because this cart reaches every corner of the corporate campus on a daily
                              basis, you seek and obtain permission to attach a small laptop computer with
                              a webbot and Global Positioning System (GPS) card to the cart. As your
                              webbot hitches a ride through the campus, it looks for open wireless network
                              connections. When it finds a wireless network, it uses the open network to send
                              its GPS location to a special website. This website logs the GPS coordinates,
                              IP address, and date of uplink in a database. If you did your homework
                              correctly, in a few days your webbot should create a map of all open Wi-Fi
                              networks, authorized and unauthorized, in your entire corporate campus.

                              Track Web Technologies
                              You could write webbots that use web page headers, the information that servers
                              send to browsers so they may correctly render websites, to maintain a list of
                              web technologies used by major corporations. Headers typically indicate the
                              type of webserver (and often the operating system) that websites use, as shown
                              in Figure 2-4.

                              C:\>curl --head http://www.chrysler.com

                              Server: IBM_HTTP_Server/2
                              Date: Sun, 04 Dec 2011 20:28:47 GMT
                              Connection: keep-alive

                              Figure 2-4: A web page header showing server technology

                                  Your webbot starts by accessing the headers of each website from a list
                              that you keep in a database. It then parses web technology information from
                              the header. Finally, the webbot stores that information in a database that is
                              used by a graphing program to plot how server technology choices change
                              over time.

                              Allow Incompatible Systems to Communicate
                              In addition to creating human-readable output, you could design a webbot
                              that only talks to other computers. For example, let’s say that you want to
                              synchronize two databases, one on a local private network and one that’s
                              behind a public website. In this case, synchronization (ensuring that both

                                                                                        Ideas for Webbot Projects   21
webbots2e.book Page 22 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              databases contain the same information) is difficult because the systems use
                              different technologies with incompatible synchronization techniques. Given
                              the circumstances, you could write a webbot that runs on your private network
                              and, for example, analyzes the public database through a password-protected
                              web service every morning. The webbot uses the Internet as a common protocol
                              between these databases, analyzes data on both systems, and exchanges the
                              appropriate data to synchronize the two databases.

             Final Thoughts
                              Studying browser limitations is one way to uncover ideas for new webbot
                              designs. You’ve seen some real-world examples of webbots in use and read
                              some descriptions of conceptual webbot designs. But, enough with theory—
                              let’s head to the lab!
                                   The next five chapters describe the basics of webbot development: down-
                              loading pages, parsing data, emulating form submission, and managing large
                              amounts of data. Once you master these concepts, you can move on to actual
                              webbot projects.




       22     Chapter 2
webbots2e.book Page 23 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                                     DOWNLOADING WEB PAGES




                                               The most important thing a webbot does is
                                              move web pages from the Internet to your
                                            computer. Once the web page is on your com-
                                        puter, your webbot can parse and manipulate it.
                                   This chapter will show you how to write simple PHP scripts that download
                              web pages. More importantly, you’ll learn PHP’s limitations and how to over-
                              come them with PHP/CURL, a special binding of the cURL library that
                              facilitates many advanced network features. cURL is used widely by many
                              computer languages as a means to access network files with a number of
                              protocols and options.
                   NOTE       While web pages are the most common targets for webbots and spiders, the Web is not the
                              only source of information for your webbots. Later chapters will explore methods for extract-
                              ing data from newsgroups, email, and FTP servers, as well.
                                   Prior to discovering PHP, I wrote webbots in a variety of languages, includ-
                              ing Visual Basic, Java, and Tcl/Tk. But due to its simple syntax, in-depth string
                              parsing capabilities, networking functions, and portability, PHP proved ideal
                              for webbot development. However, PHP is primarily a server language, and
                              its chief purpose is to help webservers interpret incoming requests and send
webbots2e.book Page 24 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              the appropriate web pages in response. Since webbots don’t serve pages
                              (they request them), this book supplements PHP built-in functions with
                              PHP/CURL and a variety of libraries, developed specifically to help you
                              learn to write webbots and spiders.

             Think About Files, Not Web Pages
                              To most people, the Web appears as a collection of web pages. But in reality,
                              the Web is collection of files that form those web pages. These files may
                              exist on servers anywhere in the world, and they only create web pages when
                              they are viewed together. Because browsers simplify the process of download-
                              ing and rendering the individual files that make up web pages, you need to
                              know the nuts and bolts of how web pages are put together before you write
                              your first webbot.
                                   When your browser requests a file, as shown in Figure 3-1, the webserver
                              that fields the request sends your browser a default or index file, which maps the
                              location of all the files that the web page needs and tells how to render the
                              text and images that comprise that web page.
                                                             Web page requested
                                    Browser                                                               Webserver
                                                                Index file returned

                              Figure 3-1: When a browser requests a web page, it first receives an index file.

                              As a rule, this index file also contains references to the other files required to
                              render the complete web page,1 as shown in Figure 3-2. These may include
                              images, JavaScript, style sheets, or complex media files like Flash, QuickTime,
                              or Windows Media files. The browser downloads each file separately, as it is
                              referenced by the index file.

                                                                                                    Webserver



                                                                             s                  Webserver     Webserver
                                                                          he
                                                                    fetc
                                                           e   file
                                                        ag
                                                      Im                                                 Webserver
                                                                                                                      Webserver
                                     Browser                 JavaSc
                                                                         ript file
                                                       Style                         fetch
                                                               shee
                                                                        t fetc
                                                                               hes
                                                                                                                Webserver
                                                                                             Webserver


                                                                                                  Webserver


                              Figure 3-2: Downloading files, as they are referenced by the index file



                              1
                                  Some very simple websites consist of only one file.

       24     Chapter 3
webbots2e.book Page 25 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              For example, if you request a web page with references to eight items your
                              single web page actually executes nine separate file downloads (one for the
                              web page and one for each file referenced by the web page). Usually, each
                              file resides on the same server, but they could just as easily exist on separate
                              domains, as shown in Figure 3-2.

             Downloading Files with PHP’s Built-in Functions
                              Before you can appreciate PHP/CURL, you’ll need to familiarize yourself
                              with PHP’s built-in functions for downloading files from the Internet.

                              Downloading Files with fopen() and fgets()
                              PHP includes two simple built-in functions for downloading files from a
                              network—fopen() and fgets(). The fopen() function does two things. First, it
                              creates a network socket, which represents the link between your webbot and
                              the network resource you want to retrieve. Second, it implements the HTTP
                              protocol, which defines how data is transferred. With those tasks completed,
                              fgets() leverages the networking ability of your computer’s operating system
                              to pull the file from the Internet.

                              Creating Your First Webbot Script
                              Let’s use PHP’s built-in functions to create your first webbot, which down-
                              loads a “Hello, world!” web page from this book’s companion website. The
                              short script is shown in Listing 3-1.

                              # Define the file you want to download
                              $target      = "http://www.WebbotsSpidersScreenScrapers.com/hello_world.html";
                              $file_handle = fopen($target, "r");

                              # Fetch the file
                              while (!feof($file_handle))
                                  echo fgets($file_handle, 4096);
                              fclose($file_handle);

                              Listing 3-1: Downloading a file from the Web with fopen() and fgets()

                                   As shown in Listing 3-1, fopen() establishes a network connection to the
                              target, or file you want to download. It references this connection with a file
                              handle, or network link called $file_handle. The script then uses fopen() to
                              fetch and echo the file in 4,096-byte chunks until it has downloaded and
                              displayed the entire file. Finally, the script executes an fclose() to tell PHP
                              that it’s finished with the network handle.
                                   Before we can execute the example in Listing 3-1, we need to examine
                              the two ways to execute a webbot: You can run a webbot either in a browser
                              or in a command shell.2


                              2
                                  See Chapter 22 for more information on executing webbots as scheduled events.

                                                                                                 D ownloading Web Pages   25
webbots2e.book Page 26 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              Executing Webbots in Command Shells
                              If you have a choice, it is usually better to execute webbots from a shell or
                              command line. Webbots generally don’t care about web page formatting,
                              so they will display exactly what is returned from a webserver. Browsers, in
                              contrast, will interpret HTML tags as instructions for rendering the web page.
                              For example, Figure 3-3 shows what Listing 3-1 looks like when executed in
                              a shell.

                              C:\>php script_3_1.php
                              <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.0 Transitional//EN">

                              <html>
                              <head>
                                         <title>Hello, world!</title>
                              </head>

                              <body>
                              Congratulations! If you can read this, <br>
                              you successfully downloaded this file.
                              </body>
                              </html>

                              Figure 3-3: Running a webbot script in a shell

                              Executing Webbots in Browsers
                              To run a webbot script in a browser, simply load the script on a webserver and
                              execute it by loading its URL into the browser’s location bar as you would
                              any other web page. Contrast Figure 3-3 with Figure 3-4, where the same
                              script is run within a browser. The HTML tags are gone, as well as all of the
                              structure of the returned file; the only things displayed are two lines of text.
                              Running a webbot in a browser only shows a partial picture and often hides
                              important information that a webbot needs.

                   NOTE       To display HTML tags within a browser, surround the output with <xmp> and
                              </xmp> tags.




                              Figure 3-4: Browser “rendering” the output of a webbot




       26     Chapter 3
webbots2e.book Page 27 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                                   Browser buffering is another complication you might run into if you try to
                              execute a webbot in a browser. Buffering is useful when you’re viewing web
                              pages because it allows a browser to wait until it has collected enough of a
                              web page before it starts rendering or displaying the web page. However,
                              browser buffering is troublesome for webbots because they frequently run
                              for extended periods of time—much longer than it would take to download
                              a typical web page. During prolonged webbot execution, status messages
                              written by the webbot may not be displayed by the browser while it is buffering
                              the display.
                                   I have one webbot that runs continuously; in fact, it once ran for seven
                              months before stopping during a power outage. This webbot could never
                              run effectively in a browser because browsers are designed to render web
                              pages with files of finite length. Browsers assume short download periods and
                              may buffer an entire web page before displaying anything—therefore, never
                              displaying the output of your webbot.

                   NOTE       Browsers can still be very useful for creating interfaces that set up or control the actions
                              of a webbot. They can also be useful for displaying the results of a webbot’s work.

                              Downloading Files with file()
                              An alternative to fopen() and fgets() is the function file(), which downloads
                              formatted files and places them into an array. This function differs from
                              fopen() in two important ways: One way is that, unlike fopen(), it does not
                              require you to create a file handle, because it creates all the network prep-
                              arations for you. The other difference is that it returns the downloaded file
                              as an array, with each line of the downloaded file in a separate array element.
                              The script in Listing 3-2 downloads the same web page used in Listing 3-1,
                              but it uses the file() command.

                              <?
                              // Download the target file
                              $target = "http://www.WebbotsSpidersScreenScrapers.com/hello_world.html";
                              $downloaded_page_array = file($target);

                              // Echo contents of file
                              for($xx=0; $xx<count($downloaded_page_array); $xx++)
                                    echo $downloaded_page_array[$xx];
                              ?>

                              Listing 3-2: Downloading files with file()

                                   The file() function is particularly useful for downloading comma-separated
                              value (CSV) files, in which each line of text represents a row of data with
                              columnar formatting (as in an Excel spreadsheet). Loading files line-by-line
                              into an array, however, is not particularly useful when downloading HTML
                              files because the data in a web page is not defined by rows or columns; in a
                              CSV file, however, rows and columns have specific meaning.



                                                                                               D ownloading Web Pages   27
webbots2e.book Page 28 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




             Introducing PHP/CURL
                              While PHP is capable when it comes to simple file downloads, most real-life
                              applications require additional functionality to handle advanced issues such
                              as form submission, authentication, redirection, and so on. These functions
                              are difficult to facilitate with PHP’s built-in functions alone. Forunately, every
                              PHP install should include a library called PHP/CURL, which automatically
                              takes care of these advanced topics. Most of this book’s examples exploit the
                              benefit of PHP/CURL’s ability to download files.
                                   The open source cURL project is the product of Swedish developer
                              Daniel Stenberg and a team of developers. The cURL library is available for
                              use with nearly any computer language you can think of. When cURL is used
                              with PHP, it’s known as PHP/CURL.
                                   The name cURL is either a blend of the words client and URL or an
                              acronym for the words client URL Request Library—you decide. cURL does
                              everything that PHP’s built-in networking functions do and a lot more.
                              Appendix A expands on PHP/CURL’s features, but here’s a quick overview
                              of the things PHP/CURL can do for you, a webbot developer.

                              Multiple Transfer Protocols
                              Unlike the built-in PHP network functions, PHP/CURL supports multiple
                              transfer protocols, including FTP, FTPS, HTTP, HTTPS, Gopher, Telnet, and
                              LDAP. Of these protocols, the most important is probably HTTPS, which
                              allows webbots to download from encrypted websites that employ the Secure
                              Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol.

                              Form Submission
                              PHP/CURL provides easy ways for a webbot to emulate browser form sub-
                              mission to a server. PHP/CURL supports all of the standard methods, or
                              form submission protocols, as you’ll learn in Chapter 6.

                              Basic Authentication
                              PHP/CURL allows webbots to enter password-protected websites that use
                              basic authentication. You’ve encountered authentication if you’ve seen
                              this familiar gray box, shown in Figure 3-5, asking for your username and
                              password. PHP/CURL makes it easy to write webbots that enter and use
                              password-protected websites.




                              Figure 3-5: A basic authentication prompt

       28     Chapter 3
webbots2e.book Page 29 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              Cookies
                              Without PHP/CURL, it is difficult for webbots to read and write cookies, those
                              small bits of data that websites use to create session variables that track your
                              movement. Websites also use cookies to manage shopping carts and authen-
                              ticate users. PHP/CURL makes it easy for your webbot to interpret the cookies
                              that webservers send it; it also simplifies the process of showing webservers
                              all the cookies your webbot has written. Chapters 20 and 21 have much more
                              to say on the subject of webbots and cookies.

                              Redirection
                              Redirection occurs when a web browser looks for a file in one place, but
                              the server tells it that the file has moved and that it should download it
                              from another location. For example, the website www.company.com may use
                              redirection to force browsers to go to www.company.com/spring_sale when a
                              seasonal promotion is in place. Browsers handle redirections automatically,
                              and PHP/CURL allows webbots to have the same functionality.

                              Agent Name Spoofing
                              Every time a webserver receives a file request, it stores the requesting agent’s
                              name in a log file called an access log file. This log file stores the time of access,
                              the IP address of the requester, and the agent name, which identifies the type of
                              program that requested the file. Generally, agent names identify the browser
                              that the web surfer was using to view the website.
                                   Some agent names that a server log file may record are shown in List-
                              ing 3-3. The first four names are browsers; the last is the Google spider.

                              Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1;) Gecko/20100921 Firefox/4.0b7pre
                              Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; MSIE 10.0; Windows NT 6.1;)
                              Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 5.1) AppleWebKit/534.25 Chrome/12.0.706.0
                              Googlebot/2.1 (+http://www.google.com/bot.html)

                              Listing 3-3: Agent names as seen in a file access log3

                                  A webbot using PHP/CURL can assume any appropriate (or inappro-
                              priate) agent name. For example, sometimes it is advantageous to identify
                              your webbots, as Google does. Other times, it is better to make your webbot
                              look like a browser. If you write webbots that use the LIB_http library (described
                              later), your webbot’s agent name will be Test Webbot. If you download a file
                              from a webserver with PHP’s fopen() or file() functions, your agent name will
                              be the version of PHP installed on your computer.




                              3
                                A more complete list of known user agent names is found at http://www.useragentstring.com/
                              pages/useragentstring.php.

                                                                                                 D ownloading Web Pages      29
webbots2e.book Page 30 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              Referer Management
                              PHP/CURL allows webbot developers to change the referer, which is the ref-
                              erence that servers use to detect which link the web surfer clicked. Some-
                              times webservers use the referer to verify that file requests are coming from
                              the correct place. For example, a website might enforce a rule that prevents
                              downloading of images unless the referring web page is also on the same
                              webserver. This prohibits people from bandwidth stealing, or writing web pages
                              using images on someone else’s server. PHP/CURL allows a webbot to set
                              the referer to an arbitrary value.

                              Socket Management
                              PHP/CURL also gives webbots the ability to recognize when a webserver isn’t
                              going to respond to a file request. This ability is vital because, without it, your
                              webbot might hang (forever) waiting for a server response that will never
                              happen. With PHP/CURL, you can specify how long a webbot will wait for
                              a response from a server before it gives up and moves on.

             Installing PHP/CURL
                              Since PHP/CURL is tightly integrated with PHP, installation should be
                              unnecessary, or at worst, easy. You probably already have PHP/CURL on
                              your computer; you just need to enable it in php.ini, the PHP configuration
                              file. If you’re using Linux, FreeBSD, OS X, or another Unix-based operating
                              system, you may have to recompile your copy of Apache/PHP to enjoy the
                              benefits of PHP/CURL. Installing PHP/CURL is similar to installing any
                              other PHP library. If you need help, you should reference the PHP website
                              (http://www.php.net) for the instructions for your particular operating
                              system and PHP version.

             LIB_http
                              Since PHP/CURL is very flexible and has many configurations, it is often
                              handy to use it within a wrapper function, which simplifies the complexities of
                              a code library into something easier to understand. For your convenience,
                              this book uses a library called LIB_http, which provides wrapper functions
                              to the PHP/CURL features you’ll use most. The remainder of this chapter
                              describes the basic functions of the LIB_http library.
                                   LIB_http is a collection of PHP/CURL routines that simplify downloading
                              files. It contains defaults and abstractions that facilitate downloading files,
                              managing cookies, and completing online forms. The name of the library refers
                              to the HTTP protocol used by the library. Some of the reasons for using this
                              library will not be evident until we cover its more advanced features. Even
                              simple file downloads, however, are made easier and more robust with LIB_http
                              because of PHP/CURL. The most recent version of LIB_http is available at
                              this book’s website.


       30     Chapter 3
webbots2e.book Page 31 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              Familiarizing Yourself with the Default Values
                              To simplify its use, LIB_http sets a series of default conditions for you,
                              as described below:

                                   Your webbot’s agent name is Test Webbot.
                                   Your webbot will time out if a file transfer doesn’t complete within
                                    25 seconds.
                                   Your webbot will store cookies in the file c:\cookie.txt.
                                   Your webbot will automatically follow a maximum of four redirections,
                                    as directed by servers in HTTP headers.
                                   Your webbot will, if asked, tell the remote server that you do not have a
                                    local authentication certificate. (This is only important if you access a
                                    website employing SSL encryption, which is used to protect confidential
                                    information on e-commerce websites.)

                                  These defaults are set at the beginning of the file. Feel free to change
                              any of these settings to meet your specific needs.

                              Using LIB_http
                              The LIB_http library provides a set of wrapper functions that simplify compli-
                              cated PHP/CURL interfaces. Each of these interfaces calls a common routine,
                              http(), which performs the specified task, using the values passed to it by the
                              wrapper interfaces. All functions in LIB_http share a similar format: A target
                              and referring URL are passed, and an array is returned, containing the
                              contents of the requested file, transfer status, and error conditions.
                                  While LIB_http has many functions, we’ll restrict our discussion to simply
                              fetching files from the Internet using HTTP. The remaining features are
                              described as needed throughout the book.

                              http_get()
                              The function http_get() downloads files with the GET method; it has many
                              advantages over PHP’s built-in functions for downloading files from the Inter-
                              net. Not only is the interface simple, but this function offers all the previously
                              described advantages of using PHP/CURL. The script in Listing 3-4 shows
                              how files are downloaded with http_get().

                              # Usage: http_get()
                              array http_get (string target_url, string referring_url)

                              Listing 3-4: Using http_get()

                              These are the inputs for the script in Listing 3-4:

                                    target_url is the fully formed URL of the desired file.
                                    referring_url is the fully formed URL of the referer.



                                                                                          D ownloading Web Pages   31
webbots2e.book Page 32 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              These are the outputs for the script in Listing 3-4:
                                    $array['FILE'] contains the contents of the requested file.
                                    $array['STATUS'] contains status information regarding the file transfer.
                                    $array['ERROR'] contains a textual description of any errors.

                              http_get_withheader()
                              When a web agent requests a file from the Web, the server returns the file
                              contents, as discussed in the previous section, along with the HTTP header,
                              which describes various properties related to a web page. Browsers and
                              webbots rely on the HTTP header to determine what to do with the contents
                              of the downloaded file.
                                   The data that is included in the HTTP header varies from application
                              to application, but it may define cookies, the size of the downloaded file,
                              redirections, encryption details, or authentication directives. Since the
                              information in the HTTP header is critical to properly using a network file,
                              LIB_http configures PHP/CURL to automatically handle the more com-
                              mon header directives. Listing 3-5 shows how this function is used.

                              # Usage: http_get_withheader()
                              array http_get_withheader (string target_url, string referring_url)

                              Listing 3-5: Using http_get()

                              These are the inputs for the script in Listing 3-5:
                                    target_url is the fully formed URL of the desired file.
                                    referring_url is the fully formed URL of the referer.

                              These are the outputs for the script in Listing 3-5:
                                    $array['FILE'] contains the contents of the requested file, including the
                                    HTTP header.
                                    $array['STATUS'] contains status information about the file transfer.
                                    $array['ERROR'] contains a textual description of any errors.

                                 The example in Listing 3-6 uses the http_get_withheader() function to
                              download a file and display the contents of the returned array.

                              # Include http library
                              include("LIB_http.php");

                              # Define the target and referer web pages
                              $target = "http://www.schrenk.com/publications.php";
                              $ref    = "http://www.schrenk.com";

                              # Request the header
                              $return_array = http_get_withheader($target, $ref);

                              # Display the header
                              echo "FILE CONTENTS \n";
                              var_dump($return_array['FILE']);

       32     Chapter 3
webbots2e.book Page 33 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              echo "ERRORS \n";
                              var_dump($return_array['ERROR']);

                              echo "STATUS \n";
                              var_dump($return_array['STATUS']);

                              Listing 3-6: Using http_get_withheader()

                              The script in Listing 3-6 downloads the page and displays the requested
                              page, any errors, and a variety of status information related to the fetch
                              and download.
                                   Listing 3-7 shows what is produced when the script in Listing 3-6 is exe-
                              cuted, with the array that includes the page header, error conditions, and
                              status. Notice that the contents of the returned file are limited to only the
                              HTTP header, because we requested only the header and not the entire
                              page. Also, notice that the first line in a HTTP header is the HTTP code,
                              which indicates the status of the request. An HTTP code of 200 tells us that
                              the request was successful. The HTTP code also appears in the status array
                              element.4

                              FILE CONTENTS
                              string(215) "HTTP/1.1 200 OK
                              Date: Sat, 08 Oct 2011 16:38:51 GMT
                              Server: Apache/2.0.53 (FreeBSD) mod_ssl/2.0.53 OpenSSL/0.9.7g PHP/5
                              X-Powered-By: PHP/5
                              Content-Type: text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1

                              "
                              ERRORS
                              string(0) ""

                              STATUS
                              array(20) {
                                ["url"]=>
                                string(39) "http://www.schrenk.com/publications.php"
                                ["content_type"]=>
                                string(29) "text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1"
                                ["http_code"]=>
                                int(200)
                                ["header_size"]=>
                                int(215)
                                ["request_size"]=>
                                int(200)
                                ["filetime"]=>
                                int(-1)
                                ["ssl_verify_result"]=>
                                int(0)
                                ["redirect_count"]=>
                                int(0)


                              4
                                  A complete list of HTTP codes can be found in Appendix B.

                                                                                              D ownloading Web Pages   33
webbots2e.book Page 34 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                                  ["total_time"]=>
                                  float(0.683)
                                  ["namelookup_time"]=>
                                  float(0.005)
                                  ["connect_time"]=>
                                  float(0.101)
                                  ["pretransfer_time"]=>
                                  float(0.101)
                                  ["size_upload"]=>
                                  float(0)
                                  ["size_download"]=>
                                  float(0)
                                  ["speed_download"]=>
                                  float(0)
                                  ["speed_upload"]=>
                                  float(0)
                                  ["download_content_length"]=>
                                  float(0)
                                  ["upload_content_length"]=>
                                  float(0)
                                  ["starttransfer_time"]=>
                                  float(0.683)
                                  ["redirect_time"]=>
                                  float(0)
                              }

                              Listing 3-7: File contents, errors, and the download status array returned by LIB_http

                              The information returned in $array['STATUS'] is extraordinarily useful for
                              learning how the fetch was conducted. Included in this array are values
                              for download speed, access times, and file sizes—all valuable when writing
                              diagnostic webbots that monitor the performance of a website.

                              Learning More About HTTP Headers
                              When a Content-Type line appears in an HTTP header, it defines the MIME,
                              or the media type of file sent from the server. The MIME type tells the web
                              agent what to do with the file. For example, the Content-Type in the previous
                              example was text/html, which indicates that the file is a web page. Knowing if
                              the file they just downloaded was an image or an HTML file helps browsers
                              know if they should display the file as text or render an image. For example,
                              the HTTP header information for a JPEG image is shown in Listing 3-8.

                              HTTP/1.1 200 OK
                              Date: Wed, 23 Mar 2011 00:06:13 GMT
                              Server: Apache/1.3.12 (Unix) mod_throttle/3.1.2 tomcat/1.0 PHP/5
                              Last-Modified: Wed, 23 Jul 2008 18:03:29 GMT
                              ETag: "74db-9063-3d3eebf1"
                              Accept-Ranges: bytes
                              Content-Length: 36963
                              Content-Type: image/jpeg

                              Listing 3-8: An HTTP header for an image file request

       34     Chapter 3
webbots2e.book Page 35 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM




                              Examining LIB_http’s Source Code
                              Most webbots in this book will use the library LIB_http to download pages
                              from the Internet. If you plan to explore any of the webbot examples that
                              appear later in this book, you should obtain a copy of this library; the latest
                              version is available for download at this book’s website. We’ll explore some of
                              the defaults and functions of LIB_http here.

                              LIB_http Defaults
                              At the very beginning of the library is a set of defaults, as shown in Listing 3-9.

       define("WEBBOT_NAME", "Test Webbot");                  # How your webbot will appear in server logs
       define("CURL_TIMEOUT", 25);                            # Time (seconds) to wait for network response
       define("COOKIE_FILE", "c:\cookie.txt");                # Location of cookie file

       Listing 3-9: LIB_http defaults

                              LIB_http Functions
                              The functions shown in Listing 3-10 are available within LIB_http. All of
                              these functions return the array defined earlier, containing downloaded
                              files, error messages, and the status of the file transfer.

       http_get($target, $ref)                              # Simple get request (w/o header)
       http_get_withheader($target, $ref)                   # Simple get request (w/ header)
       http_get_form($target, $ref, $data_array)            # Form (method ="GET", w/o header)
       http_get_form_withheader($target, $ref, $data_array) # Form (method ="GET", w/ header)
       http_post_form($target, $ref, $data_array)           # Form (method ="POST", w/o header)
       http_post_withheader($target, $ref, $data_array)     # Form (method ="POST", w/ header)
       http_header($target, $ref)                           # Only returns header

       Listing 3-10: LIB_http functions


             Final Thoughts
                              Some of these functions use an additional input parameter, $data_array,
                              when form data is passed from the webbot to the webserver. These functions
                              are listed below:

                                   http_get_form()
                                   http_get_form_withheader()
                                   http_post_form()
                                   http_post_form_withheader()

                                 If you don’t understand what all these functions do now, don’t worry.
                              Their use will become familiar to you as you go through the examples that
                              appear later in this book. Now might be a good time to thumb through
                              Appendix A, which details the features of PHP/CURL that webbot devel-
                              opers are most apt to need.


                                                                                          D ownloading Web Pages   35
webbots2e.book Page 36 Thursday, February 16, 2012 11:59 AM
