             Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase




                                  4
             THE PITCH




B     y mid-2005, Android was acquired and the future looked bright.
      But just six months earlier, things weren’t quite as rosy. In Janu-
ary of that year, the startup was desperate for cash and their main task
was the same as for most startups: getting funding. After the pivot from
a camera OS to an open source phone platform, they still had the daunt-
ing task of actually building a product, which meant they’d need more
money to hire a large enough team to do the work.
   So the company focused on three things. First, they needed a demo
to show what was possible. Next, they needed to articulate their vision
and create a pitch deck to help explain that vision. Finally, they needed
to take the demo and the slide deck on the road to pitch their story to
potential investors.


DEMO TIME
Fadden’s first job when he joined was solidifying the demo, a prototype
phone system that Swetland and Chris had been working on. It wasn’t
actually functional (for example, it showed a stock ticker on the home
                    Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



screen which used a set of hard-coded symbols and stale data). But the
demo represented a vision of what the product could be when it was
actually implemented.




                   The original demo, written by Brian Swetland
                   and Chris White and later enhanced by Fadden,
                   showing a home screen and several apps (most of
                   which were not implemented). It’s a far cry from a
                   modern Android home screen.



   One of the apps that Fadden added to the demo was a simple cal-
endar application. This early demo project would come back to haunt
him. After many intervening years of working on things throughout the
Android platform, he ended up helping out with the Android Calendar
app. Time waits for no man . . . but calendar apps do.


THE MOBILE OPPORTUNITY
As the team honed their vision, they created a slide deck to explain it.
These slides painted a picture of the opportunities that they saw for
Android in the marketplace, as well as a picture of how Android would
make money for the investors.
   The slide deck in March of 2005 had fifteen slides, which was enough
to capture the attention of VCs as well as Google.
   The pitch deck got interesting by the second slide, which compared
PC and phone markets. In 2004, there were 178 million shipments of PCs



2 Androids
              Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



worldwide. During the same period, there were 675 million phones
shipped; nearly four times as many units as PCs, but with processors and
memory that were as capable as PCs were in 1998.




           The first slide of the pitch deck. The word ANDROID in that
           custom font remained the logo for the OS for many years
           after this startup phase.




           The number of mobile phones already dwarfed the number
           of PCs being sold in 2004, providing a huge opportunity for
           phones with more capable software.




                                                                     The Pitch  3  
                   Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



   This potential in mobile hardware was a point that Dianne Hack-
born, then at PalmSource and eventually on the Android team, was also
thinking about. The mobile industry was ready to pop because there
was finally enough power for there to be a real, capable computing plat-
form: Dianne said, “You could see the writing on the wall. The hard-
ware was getting more powerful, and the market was already bigger
than PCs.”
   The presentation also identified the problem of the growing cost of
mobile software. The cost of hardware was going down, but that of soft-
ware was not, making it a larger and larger proportion of the per-handset
cost. But handset manufacturers were not experts in software platform
development and didn’t have the skill set or interest in providing the
increasing capabilities required to differentiate their software from that
of their competitors.


AN OPEN OPPORTUNITY
The second major point in the pitch deck was that there was a gap, and
an opportunity, in the market for an open platform. That is, Android
would be an operating system that was free and available to manufactur-
ers through open source. Companies would be able to use and distribute
this OS on their own phones, without being beholden to a software pro-
vider and without having to build it themselves. This open approach was
something that was simply not available at that time.
   Microsoft provided a proprietary OS that manufacturers could license
and then port to their hardware. Symbian was primarily used by Nokia,
with some uptake from Sony and Motorola. RIM had its own platform,
which it used only for its own BlackBerry devices. But there was no alter-
native out there for manufacturers that wanted a capable smartphone
without either building their own OS, putting significant effort into cus-
tomizing an existing one, and/or paying a high licensing fee.




4 Androids
                 Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase




              Slide 7 diagrammed the potential for an open platform,
              providing something that was otherwise not available at
              that time.



     Even more problematic, the systems that were available failed to
provide an ecosystem for applications. Symbian provided some of the
core infrastructure for an operating system, but the UI layer was left
as an exercise for the manufacturer, resulting in an application model
for phones where apps written for one flavor of Symbian wouldn’t nec-
essarily run on some other variation, even on phones from the same
manufacturer.
     The Java programming language, known in the server and desktop PC
world as “write once, run anywhere,” could possibly have provided this
kind of cross-device application capability, but Java ME1 fell far short of
this in the mobile space. While it did provide at least the same language
across devices (much as Symbian provided the same language of C++
for all of its implementations), Java ME addressed the wide variety of


1.
  Java ME: Java Platform, Micro Edition. See the discussion in the Jargon appendix at the end
for more on Java ME.




                                                                               The Pitch  5  
                       Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



form factors and architectures in phones by providing different versions
of the platform, called profiles. These profiles had different capabilities,
so developers needed to change their applications to run on different
devices, and often that approach failed when capabilities were drasti-
cally different across devices.
     Linux to the rescue! . . . Almost. Texas Instruments (TI) provided an
open platform based on the Linux OS kernel. All manufacturers needed
was Linux itself, reference hardware from TI, and then a huge host of
other modules that manufacturers had to acquire, license, build or oth-
erwise supply to create their own device. As Brian Swetland put it, “You
could use TI’s OMAP2 chips to build a Linux phone. So you needed TI’s
OMAP and then forty components from forty different vendors of mid-
dleware. You put all these together and you integrated them all and then
you’d have a Linux phone. And that was just absurd.”




             TI provided a Linux-based solution, but many of the details
             of drivers and other components were left as an exercise to
             the manufacturer, which wasn’t a compelling option.




2.
  Open Multimedia Applications Platform: OMAP was a series of processors from Texas
Instruments (TI) for mobile devices.




6 Androids
             Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



   Android wanted to provide the world’s first complete open handset
platform solution. It would be built on Linux, like TI’s offering but would
also provide all of the necessary pieces so that manufacturers would
have only one system to adopt in order to build and ship their devices.
Android would also provide a single programming model to application
developers, so that their apps would work the same across all devices on
which the platform ran. By having a single platform that worked across
all devices using it, Android would simplify phones for both manufactur-
ers and developers.



MAKING MONEY
The final part of the pitch (and the most important part, for the VCs they
were pitching to) was how Android was going to make money. The open
source platform described in the slides is essentially what the Android
team eventually built and shipped. But if that was all there was, the
company would not have been worth funding for VCs. Developing and
giving away an open source platform sounds great from a save-the-
world standpoint, but where’s the payoff? Where’s the upside for inves-
tors? That is, how did Android plan to make money off of a product that
they planned to simply give away? Venture capitalists fund companies
that they hope will make more (far more) than their investment back.
   The path to revenue was clear for the other platform companies in
the game. Microsoft made money by licensing its platform to Windows
Phone partners; every phone sold contributed a per-device cost back
to Microsoft. RIM made money both on the handsets they sold as well
as the lucrative service contracts that their loyal enterprise customers
signed up for. Nokia and the other Symbian adopters made money by
selling the phones that they manufactured with variations of that oper-
ating system. Similarly, all of the other handset manufacturers funded
their own software development through the revenue generated by the
phones they sold.



                                                              The Pitch  7  
                         Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



     So what was Android’s play that would fund the development of this
awesome platform that they had yet to build and which they would give
away free to other manufacturers to build their own devices?
     Carrier services.
     Carriers would provide applications, contacts, and other cloud-
based data services to their customers for Android-based handsets.
The carriers would pay Android for providing these services. Swetland
explained: “Rather than running and hosting the services [like Danger
did for its Hiptop phones], we would build the services and sell them to
the carriers.”3




              Slide 11 laid out the path to profits, based on services that
              carriers would license from Android.




PITCHING THE DREAM
The Android team pitched to a few VCs, mostly on the East Coast, far
away from Silicon Valley. As Rich Miner put it, “Andy had been up and


3.
  The system that the team eventually built and shipped stayed true to the vision laid out
in the pitch deck, except for this part about revenue from carrier services, which went away
entirely.




8 Androids
                    Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



down Sand Hill Road4 with the Android pitch as a Camera OS and had
already got a bunch of ‘No!’s, including from Red Point where he was
the EIR [Entrepreneur in Residence]. Part of my joining up was to say, ‘I
have a bunch of East Coast VCs and other people I can introduce you to.’
So we started going to mostly new people who hadn’t heard of Android
before.”
       In parallel with these VC meetings, the team was also meeting with
Google. In early January, Larry Page5 asked Andy to come to Google for
a meeting. Larry was a huge fan of his T-Mobile Sidekick (the Danger
Hiptop) phone, which Andy’s previous company had made, so he
wanted to talk to Andy about the mobile space. Andy called Nick Sears,
who was still working at T-Mobile, and asked him to come to the meet-
ing as well.
       It was a small meeting, with just Andy and Nick from the Android side
and Larry, Sergey Brin,6 and Georges Harik (an early Google employee)
from the Google side. Nick remembered the meeting as very casual, but
also that Google was clearly interested in what Andy and Android were
up to. “That meeting started out with Larry saying the Sidekick’s the best
phone that’s ever been done. Larry very much wanted to see an even
better phone get made, and he knew that’s what Andy and the group of
us were working on. At the end of that meeting they said, ‘We’d like to
help you guys.’”
       That meeting was encouraging, but nothing substantive came out of
it. In fact, Andy wondered whether they were just using the meeting as
a way to pick Andy’s brain about Danger, the company he’d founded and
left back in 2003. He thought that Google might have been interested in
purchasing Danger.


4.
  This street running through Palo Alto and Menlo Park is home to many of the Silicon Valley
venture capital firms.
5.
     Google co-founder
6.
     Google’s other co-founder




                                                                              The Pitch  9  
                    Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



   Meanwhile, the team continued pitching to VCs. Then in March,
they went to Google for another meeting. This time, they showed a
demo and shared more of their plans. Nothing significant happened
at that meeting either, but Google made it clearer that they wanted to
help the startup.
   The team was also meeting with potential manufacturing partners at
this time. They took a trip to Korea and Taiwan to visit Samsung and HTC.
The meeting with Samsung started with the CEO of the mobile phone
unit, K.T. Lee, saying he’d missed his chance with Danger and didn’t want
to see that happen again, so he was interested in getting on board with
Android. Nick described the meeting: “K.T. Lee told his team to make it
happen, so we thought it was a done deal. But then we met with his team
of 10+ mid-level managers, who said, ‘Who is going to build your OS?’
When we said ‘Brian,’ they laughed. They had 300 people working on
their own OS.”
   Samsung asked the team if they were dreaming. Nick said, “‘No, really,
Brian and a few other people are going to build the OS.’ They asked how
this would be possible and we responded that not only is it possible, but
he already did it on Sidekick.”
   After the business meetings, Samsung hosted a dinner to celebrate
the new partnership. But the Android team later learned the deal was
contingent upon securing an order from a carrier, which Nick admitted,
“wasn’t really a deal at all. It took about 18 months to convince T-Mobile
to become our Android launch partner.”
   The team didn’t come away with a deal, but they did get a device
name from it. When they later picked the device that would become the
G1, they gave it the code name “Dream” in memory of that meeting.
   From Korea, the team flew to Taiwan, where they met with the
CEO of HTC, Peter Chou. Nick remembered the meeting: “Peter men-
tioned something about exclusivity for our first device, which Brian
overheard. By the time we got back to our hotel room, Swetland had
threatened to resign because ‘I didn’t join Android to become another



10 Androids
                 Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



Danger.’7 I was concerned because Brian was so critical to our success,
but when I saw him the next day everything was fine.”
     The team continued pitching to VCs and found some success. Charles
River Ventures and Eagle River Holdings were both interested. While
they were waiting on paperwork from those firms, Google called them in
for a third meeting.
     This time, there were more people in the room, and Google was ready
to talk specifics. Andy and his team had assumed they were coming to
give an update on the company’s progress since the last meeting. But in
the middle of the presentation, Nick remembered, “They just said, ‘Let us
interrupt you there. We just want to buy you.’”
     Google turned what Andy’s team thought was a meeting of Android
pitching to Google into a meeting in which Google was pitching to them
instead. Google said if Android allowed itself to be acquired, it would do
much better than it would otherwise. Instead of having to deal with the
requirements of venture capitalists and having to charge customers and
carriers for specialized services, they could just give the OS away to the
carriers for free. In fact, it would be even better than free: Google had rev-
enue from search that they might be able to share with carriers. So rather
than having to sell carriers on something, they’d be able to form part-
nerships with them. Nick remembered that it was a powerful argument
for getting carriers on board: “We were actually going to help them make
money by doing a partnership deal with us.”
     The team from Android was game for joining Google, but there were still
many details to be figured out. In the meantime, in mid-April, they got term
sheets from both Eagle River and Charles River and decided to go with the


7.
  Swetland said, “I don’t recall the discussion, but certainly believe it could have happened.”
His memory of Danger was fresh and strong at that time. The dynamic at Danger of being
beholden to the carrier and manufacturer for product decisions was not something he wanted
to repeat. He was strongly in favor of Android’s vision for an open and independent platform.
He threatened to resign several times during his time on the Android team over decisions that
would have resulted in a closed platform.




                                                                              The Pitch  11  
                         Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase



Eagle River deal. The Google deal was far from final, but had entered negoti-
ations in early May, so they added a carve-out8 in the term sheet, to account
for the possibility that they’d do something with Google instead.




8.
  The carve out was an exception clause that allowed Android to get out of the agreement in
the event that they struck a deal with Google.




12 Androids
                  Androids Sample Chapter © 2022 by Chet Haase




                                  INDEX

B                                           Microsoft, 4, 7
BlackBerry, 4                               Miner, Rich, 8
Brin, Sergey, 9                             Motorola, 4

C                                           N
C++, 5                                      Nokia, 4, 7
camera, 1, 9
Charles River Ventures, 11                  O
Chou, Peter, 10                             open source, 1, 4, 7

D                                           P
Danger, Inc., 8, 9, 10                      Page, Larry, 9
Dream, 10                                   PalmSource, 4
drivers, 6
                                            R
E                                           RIM, 4, 7
Eagle River Holdings, 12                    Rubin, Andy, 9, 11

G                                           S
G1, 10                                      Samsung, 10
                                            Sears, Nick, 9, 10, 11
H                                           Silicon Valley, 8
Hackborn, Dianne, 4                         Swetland, Brian, 1, 6, 8, 10, 11
Hiptop, 8, 9                                Symbian, 5, 7
HTC, 10
                                            T
J                                           Texas Instruments (TI), 7
Java, 5                                     T-Mobile, 9
Java ME, 5                                  T-Mobile Sidekick, 9

K                                           W
kernel, 6                                   White, Chris, 1

L
Linux, 7

M
McFadden, Andy (“Fadden”), 1, 2
memory, 3, 10
