           TROUBLESHOOTING ROUTERS
                                           5
                   Now that you have a basic understanding
                  of how to configure a router and how various
                network types work, let’s consider the most
            common router problems. These can be boiled
        down into two groups:
            Router crashes
            Network failure or slowness
             By following a few straightforward steps, you’ll have a reasonable chance
        of fixing many of these problems. In the worst case, you can at least be well
        armed with diagnostic information when you call your ISP.

Router Crashes
        For the most part, Cisco routers keep working. On rare occasions, an
        untouched router will intermittently reboot itself, or just shut itself off
        for no apparent reason. In these situations, a SmartNet contract is

                    Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                           (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
                    invaluable—Cisco devices are mostly black boxes, and if something goes
                    wrong with one, the warranty might be your only recourse. Still, you can try a
                    few things to resolve the problem without a service contract.
                         A crashing router will often print errors to the serial console. Attach
                    the serial console to the router and leave it there. Any crash messages will
                    remain in the serial terminal’s message buffer. Copy the messages exactly, and
                    search on them in Google or http://www.cisco.com; you may well identify the
                    problem. Cisco’s technical support will certainly want copies of these messages.
                    Cisco offers articles on how to diagnose router crashes for various models.
                    Many articles are accessible without a SmartNet contract. Always search
                    http://www.cisco.com for help.
                         If you cannot discover the problem through the crash messages, check the
                    hardware itself; perhaps something’s come loose inside the router. Open
                    the case and remove any dust that has worked its way in, preferably with
                    compressed air. Reseat every removable component, such as memory or flash
                    cards, as well as add-on modules such as Cisco WIC cards and port adapters.
                    When you are certain that everything is tightly attached, replace the router in
                    the rack and turn it on. If you’re lucky, it will work.
                         If your router still crashes, you have no choice but to contact Cisco. (Well,
                    all right, you could choose to live with the problem. A few moments of lost
                    connectivity isn’t the worst thing that could happen to a company, but it
                    could hurt your job and definitely interfere with your Internet radio listening.)
                    If you don’t have a SmartNet contract, Cisco’s technical support will happily
                    transfer you to the sales department or direct you to a reseller.


                                 A U T O - F T P I N G CI S C O C RA S H D U M P S

                        You can also proactively configure your router to automatically write crash dumps
                        to an FTP or TFTP server. This only works if you do not have a NAT device between
                        your router and your (T)FTP server. If you have an FTP server without NAT, however,
                        I highly recommend you do this when installing your router. While you’ll still need
                        Cisco tech support to interpret the crash dump, they’ll be able to offer a faster
                        resolution to unusual issues. See Cisco’s website or search Google for details.




     Network Failure
                    Network failure is by far the most common router problem, even though,
                    technically, the router itself hasn’t failed—the circuit has. Backhoes digging
                    in the wrong spot cause any number of circuit outages, and you’ll never fix
                    those yourself. Before you blame the telco or ISP, however, you can do several
                    things to rule out problems on your end and maybe even quickly fix the
                    problem without outside help.
                         Most network administrators are fairly skilled at troubleshooting Ethernet
                    problems. Is there a link light? Did the duplex setting change? Is the switch
                    port bad, or did someone trip on the cable and break the little plastic thinga-
                    majig on the end? The time-honored ritual of replacing cables and switching

42   C ha pt er 5                Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                                        (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
ports solves most Ethernet problems. Internet circuit failures, on the other
hand, are far more difficult to troubleshoot, as you only have a small window
into the circuit, and most of it is handled by the ISP or telco.
     As with all troubleshooting, the first question to ask yourself is, “Did I
change anything?” If you made a change and the network went away, try
undoing that change to see if the network returns. If that doesn’t work, log
in to the router and look at the interface of the failed network connection.

Initial Circuit Tests
A phone call from a user screaming, “The Internet is down!” deserves a
closer look. But remember, for many users, the Internet is Internet Explorer,
or even just Yahoo! (if you’re my publisher’s mother). I recall one user who
insisted the Internet was broken whenever an email took more than five
minutes to arrive. Because the email system was badly overloaded, this
happened at least three times a week.
     If you think that you have an Internet failure, check a variety of network
services first. A failure in a nameserver, firewall, proxy server, switch, or other
device can appear to be a complete Internet failure to users who depend upon
it. The two most helpful diagnostic tests you can perform to determine the
extent of an actual Internet circuit outage are ping and traceroute.

ping
When you ping, you simply send a request to another Internet node asking,
“Are you there?” If the remote node receives the request and is not configured
to ignore it, it should send a response. A successful ping means that you have
basic network connectivity to that node.
     When network problems are wide enough that you suspect an Internet
circuit failure, your first attempt at resolution should be to log in to your
router and try to ping across your Internet circuit. You may have a host name
for this circuit, but use the IP address, because actual Internet problems also
mean DNS problems. Chances are good that the far side of your circuit is the
default route on your router. In the following example, the remote side of
our serial line has an IP address of 192.168.88.65. Log in to your router and
give the ping command and the target IP address.1

router# ping 192.168.88.65
Type escape sequence to abort.
Sending 5, 100-byte ICMP Echos to 192.168.88.65, timeout is 2 seconds:
!!!!!
                                                            
Success rate is 100 percent (5/5), round-trip min/avg/max = 4/4/4 ms
router#




1
  It’s also possible to try to ping from your desktop computer, but in this case, you’re not just
testing the router’s circuit; you’re testing your desktop’s connection to the network, any
intervening firewalls, and whatever other network equipment lies between your computer and
the far side of the circuit. To isolate problems, test only one small piece at a time.

               Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition            T rou bl es ho oti n g R ou te rs   43
                      (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
                         The router sends five packets to the destination IP address and gives
                    each two seconds to return. This is generally more than long enough to ping
                    anything that isn’t over a satellite link. Each exclamation point indicates a
                    packet that returns, while a period shows a packet that has vanished. Finally,
                    we see the success percentages and some statistics on packet speed , in  
                    milliseconds. The circuit shown here is certainly up.
                         On the other hand, a result like the following indicates your local circuit
                    is down.

                    Sending 5, 100-byte ICMP Echos to 192.168.88.65, timeout is 2 seconds:
                    .....
                    Success rate is 0 percent (0/5)

                                                            
                         A period is a dropped packet . Five periods indicate total circuit
                    failure . Start troubleshooting your circuit!
                         However, going back to the first ping example, just because your circuit
                    is up doesn’t mean that you’re on the Internet. Perhaps your ISP had a failure,
                    or some major backbone had a run-in with that rogue backhoe. Your next
                    step is to attempt to reach a popular Internet site such as Yahoo! from your
                    router. If your circuit is passing traffic, but you cannot ping such popular
                    and highly available sites such as Yahoo! or CNN.com, you may have a failure
                    between your network and the main Internet. That’s when you use traceroute.

                    traceroute
                    The traceroute command sends packets to a remote Internet node and
                    returns the IP address of every node it passes through on the way. Remember
                    that to reach a remote site, your traffic probably travels through your router,
                    your ISP’s router, across several backbone routers, through the destination
                    site’s ISP’s router, and through the destination site’s router before reaching
                    the actual target server. If any of these are broken, your request fails.
                         To use traceroute, just log in to the router and enter the command
                    traceroute and the IP address or hostname you’re attempting to reach.

                    router# traceroute www.blackhelicopters.org
                    Translating "www.blackhelicopters.org"...domain server [OK]

                    Type escape sequence to abort.
                    Tracing the route to bewilderbeast.blackhelicopters.org (198.22.63.43)

                       1 192.150.247.53 [ AS 26096] 4 msec 4 msec 0 msec
                      2 192.150.247.38 [AS 26096] 4 msec 8 msec 8 msec
                      3 bewilderbeast.blackhelicopters.org (198.22.63.43) [AS 26096] 12 msec
                    8 msec 8 msec
                    router#

                        Upon leaving our current router, traffic to the server goes through the
                    router with the IP address of 192.150.247.53 . If this machine had a reverse
                    DNS entry, a hostname would be displayed instead. Of three packets, two
                    return in four milliseconds , and one returns in zero milliseconds. (This

44   C ha pt er 5                Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                                        (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
doesn’t mean zero time; it just means a smaller time than your router can
measure.) This router belongs to the Autonomous System 26096 (see
                                                           
Chapter 7). The second router is crossed very quickly . On our third
    
hop , we reach a machine with the reverse DNS of “bewilderbeast
.blackhelicopters.org,” which is where the traceroute ends. Presumably,
the IP address of www.blackhelicopters.org is on this machine.

    When a packet is dropped, you will see an asterisk instead of a
    timestamp.
    If a traceroute ends in a !H, that means that the last node in the
    traceroute doesn’t know how to reach the destination. This is almost
    certainly a routing issue.
    Traceroutes are said to “die” when they turn into line after line of three
    asterisks. This may indicate that a firewall is blocking traceroute packets
    from reaching the target server, or it could be a network problem. The
    last node that appears knows where to send the packets, but it is not
    receiving a response from the next hop.

      A traceroute can help you clarify the scope of a problem: if all of your
traceroutes reach your ISP’s router and die, you can assume that your ISP has
a problem and that it’s time to give them a call.
      If the traceroute dies somewhere out in the middle of the Internet,
it’s a fair bet that there’s nothing you can do, but that the damage is limited
in scope. Or there may be some Internet “black hole” that causes many
different requests to fail. For example, for much of 1996, MCI’s Willow Springs
router cluster seemed to be the Secret Internet Packet Burial Ground; network
requests routed through that system consistently suffered horrible packet
loss and latency. It’s highly likely that the owner of such a Network of Death
is well aware of the problem and is desperately attempting to resolve the issue,
but if you have no business relationship with the network owner, there’s
nothing you or your ISP can do about it. In either event, at least you know.
      If you cannot even ping across your circuit, it’s time to get your hands
dirty and troubleshoot your circuit. But before you can troubleshoot anything,
you must understand it.

Circuit Design
Different phone companies have used many different types of connection
equipment over the decades. One of my clients recently replaced a phone
switch dating from the 1950s, featuring fuses the width of my thumb and
several inches long. (I believe that Dr. Frankenstein used such equipment,
and I have suggested offering the equipment to him for spares if he’ll only
haul it away.) There is no way this sort of equipment can be used for an
Internet connection.
    Others have systems of a more recent vintage, but a completely unknown
origin. If you have such a baroque setup, save yourself a lot of trouble and get
a modern circuit. We’re going to discuss the physical design of a modern T1
circuit, not Frankenstein collectibles.


            Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition   T rou bl es ho oti n g R ou te rs   45
                   (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
                    The Smartjack
                    Phone companies usually terminate the circuit at your location with a device
                    called a smartjack, which is a small box with green and red lights on it. The
                    smartjack has simple brains that the telco can use for troubleshooting (that’s
                    where the “smart” part comes from). The phone company or ISP is usually
                    responsible for the circuit up to the smartjack. Problems between the smart-
                    jack and the router are your responsibility.
                         The point where the smartjack is installed is called the demarc. If your
                    smartjack is far from your router, it’s not uncommon to have a professionally
                    installed extended demarc, where the circuit is run from the smartjack to a
                    point more convenient for the equipment. You’ll frequently see this in office
                    buildings, where the phone company delivers all the circuits to one central
                    location but offices are on many floors above.
                         Eventually, the circuit is delivered to a Channel Service Unit/Data
                    Service Unit (CSU/DSU), which transforms the signals arriving over the T1
                    line into something the router understands. Most modern Cisco WAN inter-
                    faces have an integrated CSU/DSU, so you can just plug the RJ-45 cable from
                    the smartjack directly into the router without having additional clunky boxes
                    sitting around the data center.



                                             O T H ER C I R C U I T T Y P E S

                        Circuits like DS3 or OC3 give their components different names, but the ideas are
                        the same. A DS3 is delivered over coax instead of RJ-45, but it still goes back to a
                        telco-managed box on your wall.




                    Examining the Circuit
                    The first line of the sho int output for an interface describes the basic state of
                    the interface, as discussed in Chapter 3. If the line is up, the router is seeing
                    a reasonable signal from the T1. If the line is down, the router is not seeing a
                    signal over the T1. While you still need to check for other errors on the inter-
                    face, not seeing a signal is a pretty solid sign that something is seriously wrong.
                         If the circuit is up but the protocol is down, the router cannot
                    understand the signals coming over the T1. If this is a brand-new circuit, it is
                    probably misconfigured, but in mature circuits, this may mean line noise or
                    damage. (It can also mean that someone else somewhere along the circuit
                    touched things, but no ISP or telco would even dream of doing that, not even
                    if some underpaid and overworked tech thought you wouldn’t notice if he
                    just tweaked one setting while nobody was looking.)
                         Although you’ll want to check the rest of the information available on
                    this interface, there are things you can try first.




46   C ha pt er 5                Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                                        (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
Resetting the Interface
First, if some network device along the circuit is confused, resetting the
interface may kick that device back to its senses.

router# conf t
router(config)# int s1/0
router(config-int)# shut

    Count to 10 slowly, and then reopen the interface.

router(config-int)# no shut
router(config-int)# ^Z
router#

    If your circuit is back up, congratulations! If not, the next step is to reboot
the router.

Rebooting the Router
While pulling the power cord out of the back, counting to 10, and plugging
it back in will do the trick, as long as you’re logged in you might as well restart
the router in a slightly more graceful manner.

router# reload

    The router will prompt you for confirmation and then restart itself. If
your router has a separate CSU/DSU, power cycle it simultaneously.

Nothing Worked!
If neither of these works, you must phone your ISP or telco. You can make
this call in one of two ways: either armed with lots of information so you can
resolve the problem as quickly as possible or in a hysterical panic. When you
use the hysterical panic technique, you don’t have to bother calming yourself
down. An ISP tech usually accepts screaming abuse from customers as part of
the service as he tries to extract useful information from your cries. If you
prefer the hysterical panic technique, make that call now. If not, arm yourself
with all the information your router offers before calling. No matter how good
your ISP’s customer service department is, failure of your network is more
important to you than it is to the person answering the phone. After all, that
support tech still has his email!
     When you make that call, however, you will sound much more impressive
and serious if you can say, “Our circuit protocol has failed, and we are receiv-
ing hundreds of CRC errors a second,” than if you say, “Uh, our circuit isn’t
working.” Your router provides you with a wide range of debugging informa-
tion if you know how to read it.




             Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition   T rou bl es ho oti n g R ou te rs   47
                    (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
                        Interface Debugging Information
                        Each router interface provides a full description of the work it is performing,
                        the errors it sees, and what actions it is taking. While we won’t cover every
                        scrap of information your router offers, you should understand some of the
                        basics when you have to troubleshoot. Here’s the output from a sho int on a
                        standard Cisco T1 interface. Your output might look slightly different,
                        depending on your interface and circuit type.



                                                     INPUT AND OUTPUT

                            Remember, a router’s “input” is traffic that is entering the router via the interface,
                            while the “output” is leaving the router via that interface. In the case of a T1, input is
                            coming in from the outside world, while output is leaving your network and heading
                            out over the T1. On a typical Ethernet interface, router input is leaving the local net-
                            work, and output is arriving at the local network.




                        #sho int s1/0
                        ...
                        Last input 00:00:07, output 00:00:07, output hang never
                        Last clearing of "show interface" counters 5w6d
                        ...
                        5 minute input rate 6000 bits/sec, 6 packets/sec
                        5 minute output rate 6000 bits/sec, 2 packets/sec
                       6413455 packets input, 2153942875 bytes, 0 no buffer
                       Received 0 broadcasts, 0 runts, 641 giants, 0 throttles
                       36851 input errors, 327 CRC, 36520 frame, 0 overrun, 0 ignored, 4 abort
                        2871476 packets output, 608779651 bytes, 0 underruns
                       0 output errors, 0 collisions, 31 interface resets
                        0 output buffer failures, 0 output buffers swapped out
                       27 carrier transitions
                       DCD=up DSR=up DTR=up RTS=up CTS=up

                             The “last input” and “last output” values show how long it has been
                        since packets entered or left this interface. This particular interface has been
                        idle for seven seconds, which is not surprising with a problematic T1 or a
                        slow network.
                             Cisco tracks most errors with an incrementing counter. The last clearing
                        of “show interface” counters space shows the last time this incremental
                        counter was reset to zero. In this example, the counters have been increment-
                        ing for five weeks and six days, far too long to be useful for troubleshooting
                        a problem happening right now—those 15 million errors the router has
                        recorded could have happened a month ago or in the last minute, and there’s




48   C ha pt er 5                    Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                                            (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
no way to tell. It’s very easy to reset these counters, though, and you don’t
even have to go into configure mode:

router# clear counters
Clear "show interface" counters on all interfaces [confirm]
router#

     This resets all the counters on all the interfaces to zero. You can now do
a sho int on your failed interface several times in succession and easily see if
any error counters are increasing while the problem is happening. (Yes, you
can do this while the error counters are all high, but it’s much easier to see
the difference between 0 and 300 than to see the difference between 15831594
and 15831894, especially if many error counters have nonzero values.)

Input/Output Rates
The five-minute input and output rates can be useful for troubleshooting .
Although they are averaged over the last five minutes, you can check the
interface several times in succession to see how they change. Is the average
tending toward zero or climbing rapidly?
     Remember, a T1 only handles 1.54MB/sec, or 1,540,000 bits per second.
If your average throughput is close to that, that’s why your network feels slow.
A distributed denial-of-service attack or a sudden rush on your website can
make your users feel like the Internet is down when actually it’s just a massive
flood of traffic making your circuit useless. The totals of all packets processed
since the counters were cleared can be useful in a similar way .

Types of Errors
                                                                        
The interface then gets specific on the types of errors it sees . Broadcasts
are standard network broadcasts and generally are not a cause for alarm. Runt
packets are smaller than the router’s minimum packet size, and giants are
larger than the maximum packet size. Neither should be on a T1 circuit.
If they appear on an Ethernet segment, some network device is sending
them out.
     Input errors cause packets to be rejected . The interface presents a total
of all the input errors and then breaks them down by category. Although a
certain number of errors is normal, if input errors comprise over one percent
of your incoming packets, you have a problem. In this example, we have
36,000 input errors. We’ve input about 6.4 million packets, though, so this is
far less than one percent of all packets, an acceptable error rate.
     CRC and frame input errors probably indicate some sort of line noise; if
these are happening frequently, call your ISP or telco and have them trouble-
shoot the circuit.




            Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition   T rou bl es ho oti n g R ou te rs   49
                   (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
                        Overrun, ignored, and abort input errors indicate that the router cannot
                    process incoming packets quickly enough and is forced to drop surplus
                    packets. You can adjust the router’s internal buffers, but this is very tricky to
                    do correctly. I strongly encourage you to use Cisco’s SmartNet support and
                    have a technician help you adjust the buffers to fit your particular situation.
                        Output errors are most common on an Ethernet interface , where an
                    extremely high collision rate can interfere with the network’s performance.
                    On a serial line, output errors are most commonly the result of running out
                    of buffers for outgoing packets (though this is quite rare on small routers).
                    Again, if you’re consistently running out of buffers, contact Cisco for help.

                    Using Carrier Transition to Detect a Bad Serial Connection
                    One of the more useful ways to detect a bad serial connection is the carrier
                                     
                    transitions line . A carrier transition is when the interface either goes up or
                    comes down. It’s entirely possible for a serial line to bounce up and down so
                    quickly that you won’t catch it by successive sho int commands. The carrier
                    transition increments whenever the line goes down, and again whenever it
                    comes back up. By watching this field, you can detect an unstable circuit.
                        Finally, a serial line will list the signals that it is receiving over the line .
                    For the line to be functional, all of these need to be up; if any are not up
                    even after rebooting everything, call your ISP or telco. Your router cannot
                    process traffic it does not receive!

     Extended Pings and Circuit Troubleshooting
                    Cisco routers can use a variety of ping tests to check IP connectivity to other
                    networks. This is very useful for testing troublesome serial circuits that are
                    not down but that are not actually working properly. At times, a mispro-
                    visioned circuit will cause problems that do not appear on sho int, but that
                    cause no end of headaches.
                         On more than one occasion, I’ve dealt with a circuit with a perfect-looking
                    interface that passed every standard ping test with flying colors and yet was
                    useless. GIF files could not be moved across these circuits and Windows
                    networking infrastructure protocols would not work over them. In each case,
                    the problem was exactly the same: the circuit was provisioned incorrectly
                    (with AMI encoding instead of the modern standard of B8ZS). This meant
                    that the circuit could not pass large all-zero packets. The .gif image format
                    uses a lot of large all-zero packets, as do the Windows network protocols.

           NOTE     Other physical problems generate different symptoms; this particular example is just the
                    one that seems destined to haunt me. Your data circuit should accept whatever sort of
                    data you want to transmit, even if it is a whole lot of nothing!




50   C ha pt er 5                Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                                        (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
    To perform an extended ping test, enter enable mode and just type ping.

router# ping
Protocol [ip]:
Target IP address: 192.168.5.3

     The default protocol is IP, so just press ENTER. Then give the IP address
you want to ping. Generally, this is the IP address of the router on the other
side of your serial link.
     Don’t ping Internet sites to test your circuit’s status. That tests every link
between your router and the remote Internet site! The other end of the circuit
is the only reasonable place to ping when testing your own circuit’s behavior.

Repeat count [5]: 1000

    When using extended ping, use more than five pings. A few hundred is
the bare minimum for this sort of test, but a thousand is usually reasonable.
Either your test will be over in just a few seconds, or you’ll interrupt it. If you
sweep the range of sizes (as recommended later), the router will decide how
many pings are necessary to properly cover the range, and the value you enter
here will be ignored anyway.

Datagram size [100]:

     You could specify a size here if you wished, but we’ll be doing something
slightly more advanced in the extended commands.

Timeout in seconds [2]:

    Two seconds is a very reasonable timeout. Giving a longer timeout is
generally useless for most IP circuits because either the packet will return in
much less time or you’ll wait that much longer for failed packets. With a
shorter timeout, you may miss perfectly legitimate return packets that are
delayed by a busy remote router.

Extended commands [n]: y

    If you take the default n (no) here, the router will run the ping as you
have specified it. But most of the truly nifty options are in the extended
commands, so enter y for yes.

Source address or interface:




            Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition    T rou bl es ho oti n g R ou te rs   51
                   (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
                        You can change your source IP address and send packets from a
                    particular interface, which is useful to do on backbone routers but not for
                    most small offices. I highly recommend that you don’t try this because the
                    results will only confuse you. (Tracking down problems is difficult enough
                    without using an easily misunderstood tool!)

                    Type of service [0]:
                    Set DF bit in IP header? [no]:
                    Validate reply data? [no]:

                         These three flags manipulate or verify TCP/IP data but aren’t generally
                    useful for day-to-day work. If you’re not familiar with the innards of TCP/IP,
                    just take the defaults.

                    Data pattern [0xABCD]: 0xffff

                         A ping packet contains four bytes, and you can choose what data to put
                    in them. The hexadecimal 0xABCD is the default, but two common choices
                    are 0x0000 (all zeros) and 0xFFFF (all ones). Many misconfigured circuits
                    fail with certain sizes of all-zero or all-one packets.

                    Loose, Strict, Record, Timestamp, Verbose[none]:

                        You can choose to use loose or strict source rerouting, record the
                    route taken by the ping packets, datestamp each ping packet, or use verbose
                    output. If you don’t know what loose or strict source routing are, don’t try
                    to use them. For most situations, almost none of these are useful, but you
                    might try verbose output sometime for your own edification; just enter v at
                    the prompt.

                    Sweep range of sizes [n]: y

                         By sweeping the range of sizes, you send packets ranging from very small
                    to quite large. Definitely set this when testing a troublesome circuit. The
                    smaller packets will appear quickly, larger packets much more slowly. If you
                    sweep the range of sizes, the ping command will ignore the count you entered
                    earlier; you will need to interrupt it with CTRL-^.

                    Sweep min size [36]:
                    Sweep max size [18024]:

                        These are the minimum and maximum packet sizes when sweeping. The
                    defaults range from quite tiny to reasonably large.

                    Sweep interval [1]: 50

                        The sweep interval is the increment to the packet size when sweeping.
                    For example, with Cisco’s default, the first packet sent will be 36 bytes, the


52   C ha pt er 5               Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                                       (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
         second 37 bytes, the third 38, and so on, until a packet size of 18,024 is
         reached. Picking a larger increment than 1 will accelerate the test. Also, you
         may not want to let your router send 17,092 pings to perform the test with
         every possible sized packet in the range.
             Once you have chosen all the values, the ping will run.

         Type escape sequence to abort.
         Sending 1800, [36..18024]-byte ICMP Echos to 198.88.118.11, timeout is 2
         seconds:
         Packet has data pattern 0xFFFF
         !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
         ...

             Each exclamation point indicates a successful ping, while a period
         indicates a missed one. This ping test will continue until the 1800 packets
         have been sent. Reducing the increment will increase the number of pings
         the router sends. Again, you can interrupt the test at any time by pressing
         CTRL-^.

  NOTE   Small packets appear more quickly than large packets, and the largest packets in the
         ping sweep test may make you think that the router has stopped responding. Note which
         sorts of packets the router has trouble with.

             For circuits that are behaving poorly or exhibiting “weird” behavior, I
         suggest running the extended ping test three times: once with the default
         data pattern, once with an all-zero data pattern, and once with all ones. If
         your circuit has trouble with certain sorts of packets, this process will probably
         uncover it. If not, your circuit is probably running cleanly.


Phoning the ISP
         So you’ve opted to gather all your debugging information before calling. You
         know which sorts of errors are appearing on your circuit, and what sort of
         packets your circuit will and will not pass. Now what?
               You got your T1 circuit from either a telco or an ISP. Phone them. The
         first words out of your mouth should be, “Hi, I have a down circuit.” They will
         ask you for your circuit ID, customer number, or other identifying informa-
         tion. When you reach a technical support person, explain:

             The state of the line itself (both line and protocol down, just protocol
             down, or both line and protocol up)
             That you have rebooted your router and CSU/DSU (this will almost cer-
             tainly be their first suggestion)
             The types of errors you are seeing: CRC, framing, overruns, aborts, and
             so on
             The results of any ping tests you have run



                      Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition    T rou bl es ho oti n g R ou te rs   53
                             (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
                         The technician should check the ISP’s end of the circuit and phone the
                    telco who originally provisioned the line. Most telephone companies will
                    return a call to the circuit owner (usually the ISP) within an hour with an
                    initial status report.

           NOTE     While your ISP should handle circuit issues, especially when they own the circuit, if the
                    problem is actually a failed circuit, it may take hours to repair.

                    Circuit Loopback Tests
                    T1 circuits include all sorts of intelligent equipment such as repeaters,
                    switches, and smartjacks. The telco can talk to this equipment using a series
                    of successive loopback tests to quickly identify where a problem lies and what
                    piece of equipment is at fault.
                          The telco has a diagram listing every piece of equipment along a circuit.
                    A loopback test is where they attempt to communicate with each piece of
                    equipment in succession. For example, the telco central office will try to
                    “loop up” the first piece of equipment outside their office—say, the repeater
                    in the little gray box up the street. If they can easily communicate with that
                    device, and if that device can return data it receives to the central office, they
                    will loop up the second closest device and test it. When something fails to
                    respond, they send a technician out to examine and repair that device.
                          Eventually, the telco will work their way down to looping up the smartjack
                    at your demarc. If the telco can communicate correctly with the smartjack,
                    they will probably try to loop up your CSU/DSU. The telco/ISP’s responsibility
                    technically ends at the smartjack, but they will frequently go the extra step
                    simply to demonstrate that it isn’t their problem. (This tactic should be pain-
                    fully familiar to anyone who has worked a help desk!) If the telco says that
                    they can cleanly loop up the smartjack but cannot loop up the CSU/DSU,
                    the problem lies somewhere between the CSU/DSU and the smartjack and is
                    unquestionably your problem.
                          This sort of exhaustive test takes time, especially on a long circuit, but
                    it is the quickest way to identify a problem. The telco may have to send a
                    technician out to your facility to perform testing. You may well have to have
                    someone stay after hours to let the technician in and out of the building.

     WARNING        A loopback test will completely disable your circuit! If your circuit is already down, then
                    they can loopback all they want, but if you are merely suffering degraded performance,
                    you may want to ask the ISP or telco to perform the test after hours. It’s all a question of
                    what your environment requires.
                        Once you know without a doubt that the problem is with the telco or the
                    ISP, the only skill required to fix the issue is a willingness to make a nuisance
                    of yourself at the ISP’s help desk.




54   C ha pt er 5                 Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition
                                         (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
       If It’s Your Problem
       If the ISP can loop up the smartjack but not your router, it’s your problem.
       Congratulations! The good news is, as you have very few components in your
       section of the circuit, testing your equipment won’t take very long. The bad
       news is, many components you do have will require outside help.
            Check to make sure everything in your system is tightly attached. A loose
       connection can cause no end of problems. “Is it plugged in?” is still a good
       question in the comms closet.
            A common culprit in circuit failures is wiring. Replace the wiring
       between the smartjack and your CSU/DSU. A T1 circuit uses a standard Cat 5
       cable, so many people plug in a cable that they had in a drawer somewhere.
       A T1 is less forgiving than Ethernet, however. Use a good premade cable
       with sturdy connectors on both ends.
            If you’ve replaced all your wiring, everything is firmly seated, and reboots
       and resets have not solved your problem, phone your CSU/DSU’s technical
       support line. On a modern Cisco system, this would be Cisco itself.

NOTE   If your vendors start each blaming the other, as is common among lower-level technical
       support staff, do not be afraid to get them all on the phone at once and let them fight
       it out.
           Now that you know how to troubleshoot your router, you can learn how
       to upgrade it.




                    Cisco Routers for the Desperate, 2nd Edition      T rou bl es ho oti n g R ou te rs   55
                           (C) 2009 by Michael W. Lucas
