έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα    έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                                2

                                    Digital Operations




                                                                                                                                                                                                         And



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Not
                                                                                                                                                                            Or
         έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




     The Computer's World Is Binary

                                                                                                       Okay!                                                                                              But that also means
                                                                                                     Today is                                                                                            you have to teach me
                                                                                                     my treat!                                                                                                 about CPUS!




                                                                                                                 On your way back
Wow... youέΑβre
                                                                                                                  from schoOl...?!
pretTy pushy...




                                                                                                                 Does that mean youέΑβre
                                                                                                                 not a shut-in anymore?
                                                                                                                    So youέΑβre an ex-
                                                                                                                   hikikomori now??
                                                         I am a bit
                                                          hungry
                                                         though...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Could you
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             please set your
 Why do I have to meEt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             crazy-switch to
with you on my way back
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ofF for once?!
 from schoOl anyway?
          έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα    έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




The Reciprocal States of 1 and 0
                                                                                                                                                                        Last time you said that,
    Okay, let me start                                                                                                                                                έΑεcomputers live in a world
   ofF with a question!                                                                                                                                                of 1S and 0S,έΑζ but that was
                                                                                                                                                                         alL pretTy abstract.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ayumi




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               But what do you
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mean by 1S and 0S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   anyway?



 HmM. A goOd question alL of                                                                                                                                                                                                       Two reciprocal
  a sudDen. You can think of                                                                                                                                                                                                          states...
 1S and 0S as two reciprocal
  states that are opPosites.




                                                                    TheyέΑβre more                                                                                                                                                               You mean like
                                                                  like signals than                                                                                                                                                          έΑεlight and dark,έΑζ
                                                                   numbers realLy.                                                                                                                                                         έΑεlife and death,έΑζ or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               έΑεon and ofF?έΑζ




Precisely!                                                                                                                        High


                                                                              Voltage*


                                                                                                                                  Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Time

                                                                                                                                                                                          Voltage changes with time


                                                                              To put it another way, the
                                                                           voltages in computer circuits
                                                                          generalLy falL into two bands.
                                                                            High voltages are close to
                                                                            the supPly voltage, and low
                                                                          voltages are close to ground,                                                                                                                                                                                            37
                                                                                    at zero volts.
                 έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ    έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ    έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




        I seE!
  If itέΑβs just two                                                                                                                   Yeah.
 voltages, itέΑβs alL
pretTy clear then.




                                                                                                                              AlL computers use these
    The voltage is                                                                                                           two values (zero and one,
 either low or high.                                                                                                           or low and high*) when
  ItέΑβs realLy simple!                                                                                                         performing operations.
                                                                                                                                     * In this boOk, weέΑβlL treat low as zero and high as one,
                                                                                                                                     but itέΑβs posSible to do it the other way around as welL.
                                                                                                                                     ItέΑβs up to the system designer which asSignment to use.

 Decimal and Binary
                                                                                                                                                      Hehehe! NarRow-minded,
     HmM... but what can you                                                                                                                              foOlish human!
       realLy do with just
             1S and 0S?




  WouldnέΑβt you
 only be able to
 do very simple
calculations with                                                                                                                                                                                                      Computers and humans
 just those two                                                                                                                                                                                                        think in difFerent ways!
    numbers?




 Humans use the decimal
  number system which
   uses the ten digits
      from 0 to 9.

                                                                                                                                                                Decimal                                                                              Binary
                                                                                                                                                              (or base 10)                                                                         (or base 2)




                                                                                                                                                                               But computers expresS alL
                                                                                                                                                                                 numbers in binary using
                                                                                                                                                                                     only 1S and 0S.

38   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
            έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                                  As you can seE,
      Decimal                       Binary                                                                                      you donέΑβt neEd more
                                                                                                                                   than 1S and 0S!!


                                                                        Another
                                                                         digit!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wow, It realLy is
                                                                        Another
                                                                         digit!                                                                                                                                                                       only 1S and 0S! But
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     the number of digits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    increases realLy fast
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in binary...



                                                                        Another
                                                                         digit!




Another
 digit!
                                                                                                             By the way, a binary digit
                                                                                                            (a one or a zero) is also
                                                                                                             calLed a bit in computer
                                                                                                                terminology. ThatέΑβs
                                                                                                               realLy important, so
     Comparing decimal                                                                                            donέΑβt forget it!
        and binary




                                                                                                                                                                                    Come now, are you
                                                                                                                                                                                     prepared to dive
                                                                                                                                                                                    into the world of
                                                                                                                                                                                        1S and 0S?!
                Four digits,
                so four bits




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        s               h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    swi



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ah, sure!
             A four-digit binary
          number is four bits... So,
           to expresS the decimal
          number 9, we would neEd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I wonder if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    heέΑβs always
            four bits (1001), right?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    this hyper...
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                           Expressing Numbers in Binary




                 Well then, letέΑβs learn the basics of binary, or base 2, math! LetέΑβs start by thinking about the
                 decimal, or base 10, system that we use every day.




                                                                   Hundreds                                                                                            Tens                                                                                Ones


                              Any number to the power of zero is equal to one. For example, 100 = 1, and 20 = 1.



                     For example, the number 356 is divided up as in the illustration above. Each digit is
                 multiplied by successive powers of ten to get the final value.



                 Okay! ItέΑβs really easy if I just think of it like different coin denominations: 356 yen is just
                 three 100-yen coins (102), five 10-yen coins (10 1), and six 1-yen coins (100) added together.



                 ThatέΑβs right. The next step is to apply that same logic to binary. We just swap the 10 in our
                 decimal calculations for a 2 in the binary case to get the appropriate factors for each digit.
                 Take a look at this picture.




40   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ    έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                              Eights                                                              fours                                                           twos                                                        ones



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (Decimal)




            Uh-huh! I donέΑβt think anyone uses coins like this though... but if someone did, I would just
            take either 1 or 0 of each of the 8 yen, 4 yen, 2 yen, and 1 yen coins, right?

                This means that the binary 1011 would translate into 8 + 0 + 2 + 1 = 11. As soon as
            you understand the basic principle, itέΑβs easy!


            By the way, this also works for fractional expressions. Take a look at this.




                                                                              Ones                                                                        one-tenths                                                              one-hundredths


               In decimal, each digit after the decimal point has factors using negative powers (10-1,
            10 etc.). So we have one-tenth (0.1), one-hundredth (0.01), and so on.
                     -2




            Sooo, itέΑβs the same reasoning with binary, right? That means that it would be (2-1, 2-2, 2-3)
            and so on after the decimal point as we add more digits. So the factors would be one-half
            (0.5), one-fourth (0.25), one-eighth (0.125), and so on. It seems a bit cumbersome, but I
            think I get it.




                                                                                                                                                                                                  The Computer's World Is Binary 41
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                      Fixed-Point and Floating-Point




                 Next up, IέΑβll teach you a really important concept. In computers, there are two ways to
                 store fractionsέΑΦeither fixed-point or floating-point.

                      When using extremely small values like 0.00000000000000...001 or very large
                 values like 1000000000000000..., it is a lot more practical to use floating-point fractions.




                 Hmm... Why is that? WhatέΑβs the difference?



                 Well, for example, instead of writing a billion in decimal, as 1,000,000,000, you could write
                 it as 109 to save some space, right? We call this form scientific notation or standard form,
                 where the n in 10 n is called the exponent. Floating-point fractions use scientific notation
                 when storing values.

                      In contrast, fixed-point fractions express values the way weέΑβre used to, with a decimal
                 point. When expressing integers with this method, you can imagine the decimal point being
                 at the far right of the number. HereέΑβs a comparison of the two.


                                                                                      Fixed-point                                                                                                         Floating-point

                                                                                                                                              decimal
                                                                                                                                               point




42   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε    έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




            Oh, okay. So if youέΑβre using fixed-point fractions to express really large or really small
            numbers, the number of digits you need increases by a lot. But if youέΑβre using floating-
            point, only the exponent gets bigger and smaller, while the number of digits stays the
            same. Yeah, thatέΑβs really useful!


            ThatέΑβs right. That last example was in decimal, but since computers use binary, the prin-
            ciple becomes even more relevant. The most common variant used is this one.


                     An example                                                                                                                                                                                   Exponent
                     significand

                                                                                                 Significand                                                                             Base



                                                         An example of floating-point representation inside a computer
                                                                  (using a base 10 number for illustration)




            I made our example here, 1.69, decimal just to make it easier to understand. The number
            would be in binary in a computer. The important part here is that this significand always
            has to be greater than 1 and less than 2.



            Hmm... So this representation makes it easy for computers to handle extremely small and
            extremely large numbers, right? TheyέΑβre also easy to use in calculations, huh.



            Yes! And itέΑβs also important to understand that the speed with which you can calculate
            using floating-point numbers is a very important question and ties in deeply with CPU
            performance. (See page 139 for a more detailed explanation.)

                Generally, scientific calculations require an accuracy of only around 15 digits, but in
            some cases, 30 are used. Some modern encoding algorithms even use integers of up to
            300 digits! ItέΑβs worth mentioning that gaming systems that process real-time, high-fidelity
            graphics use floating-point arithmetic extensively.


            Ugh... I donέΑβt think I could do those calculations in my head. I hate to lose to computers, but
            I hope theyέΑβre at least advancing some fields of science!




                                                                                                                                                                                                 The Computer's World Is Binary 43
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                              Addition and Subtraction in Binary



                 ItέΑβs finally time to talk about binary arithmetic. LetέΑβs start by thinking about addition. First
                 off, adding two bits works like this!


                                                                                              0 + 0 = 0, 0 + 1 = 1, 1 + 0 = 1, 1 + 1 = 10


                 Okay, thatέΑβs easy! The last equation, 1 + 1 = 10, means that we carried the 1 to the second
                 place value and the first digit became 0, right?




                                                                                                           CarRied to the
                                                                                                          next place value
                                                                                                               place



                 Yeah. If you understand how to add one bit to another, you should be able to understand
                 calculations with more digits as well. For example, when adding the binary numbers
                 (1011)2 + (1101)2, you just need to start from the right and work your way to the left, car-
                 rying digits as you go.* Take a look here.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DonέΑβt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           forget
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          to carRy
                                                                                                                      CarRy                                                                                                                                 the 1!




                 Uh-huh, I just have to be careful with the carries, right? Binary addition is pretty simple!
                 Or, it might just be my genius shining through.


                 Hey! Okay then, letέΑβs take a look at subtraction next. When doing subtraction, it is impor-
                 tant to learn how to create negative values using a technique called twoέΑβs complement.

                    Adding the twoέΑβs complement (a number that corresponds to the negative version of a
                 number) of a binary number A to another number B is the same as subtracting A from B!!
                 What do you thinkέΑΦpretty cool, right?

                 * ()2 means the number is in binary representation and () 10 means decimal representation.


44   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε    έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




            Ahh... IέΑβm sorry to stop you when youέΑβre on a roll, but I didnέΑβt understand that at all...
            What are you talking about?


            LetέΑβs start out slow in decimal. First off, letέΑβs agree that subtracting 15 is the same as add-
            ing -15. But what would you do if you werenέΑβt allowed to use the minus sign at all? Is there
            some other number that we can use to represent the number -15?



            I... I have no idea. Stop putting on airs and just teach me already!




            Where did your genius go? Well, have a look at these two equations then.


                                                                                                 Equation A                                                                                      Equation B




                                                                                                                                                                                     Ignore!



                 Looking at just the final two digits of these equations, we see that the result of equa-
            tion A is 0 and the result of equation B is 00. We could therefore say that for the last two
            digits, the results of 15 + (-15) and 15 + 85 are the same!



            Whaaa...? YouέΑβre right, 0 and 00 are the same! But what happens to the 1 in 100 of the
            equation B result?



            Hah! Since weέΑβre doing two-digit math at the moment, we donέΑβt care about digits that carry
            over beyond those two. Just pretend you canέΑβt see them! We call those overflow, and we
            just ignore them.




            What kind of twisted reasoning is that? Is that even allowed?



                                                                                                                                                                                                 The Computer's World Is Binary 45
                έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




               Heh heh heh! Surprised? In situations like this, we say that 85 is the tenέΑβs complement
               of 15. In other words, we say that a numberέΑβs complement in some base is the smallest
               number you have to add to the original number to make the numberέΑβs digits overflow. As
               the name suggests, you can think of the numbers έΑεcomplementingέΑζ each other to reach the
               next digit.

                    And this complement corresponds to the original valueέΑβs negative form. So in this case,
               85 is essentially equal to -15.


                            LetέΑβs take another example. When calculating 9647 έΑΥ 1200 = 8447, we might
                            as well calculate 9647 + 8800 = 18447 and ignore the carry. ThatέΑβs because in
                            the result, we see that the lower four digits are the same. Therefore, we can use
                            8800 as the tenέΑβs complement of 1200 during addition to get the same result as
                            we would get using subtraction.


               Uhh... This is getting pretty hard to grasp! So using complements, we can perform sub-
               traction using addition instead. I suppose that might be useful? So what happens if we try
               this farfetched solution with binary numbers?



               ItέΑβs not farfetchedέΑΦitέΑβs awesome! ItέΑβs logical!! Anyway, let me show you how to do it in
               binary.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AdD the two numbers:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    if the result is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0 (ignoring the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  overflow), it means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the numbers are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    complementary.

                                 Ignore!



                    As you can see, when you add two binary numbers and ignore the overflow, if the
               result equals 0, it means the two numbers are complementary. To a number, simply add its
               complement instead.



               Okay... But finding the complement seems kinda hard...




               DonέΑβt worry, there is a really easy way to find a twoέΑβs complement. Just follow these steps.




46 Chapter 2   Digital Operations
    έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε    έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη    έεμ    έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                             LetέΑβs find the twoέΑβs complement to do subtraction!


Step 1: Invert all the digits of the first number from 1 to 0 and vice versa. (This is also
called finding the oneέΑβs complement.)

Step 2: Add 1 to this inverted version of the number.
And youέΑβll end up with the twoέΑβs complement!




                Sweet! I tried finding the complement of that last example. Using this method, it was easy.




                           Flip
                         alL the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AdD 1!
                         digits!

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Complement




                Computers (actually the ALUs) use this type of reasoning all the time for arithmetic opera-
                tions (addition and subtraction). The only difference is that most ALUs perform subtraction
                by adding the first number and the inverted second number. Then finally, they add 1 to
                that sum. The order of operations is different, but the end result is the same, right?

                     And since the computer calculations only deal with 1s and 0s, this method is both
                really simple and incredibly fast at the same time.


                I see. So there are some merits to binary, I suppose!




                                                                                                                                                                           A great
By the way... DonέΑβt                                                                                                                                                      discovery!                                                   ...
french fries kinda
 loOk like 1S and
onion rings kinda
  loOk like 0S?


 This must be like...
binary in the fried-
   foOd world?!



                                                                                                                                                                                                     The Computer's World Is Binary 47
                 έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




             What Are Logical Operations?

 Integrated Circuits Contain
 Logic Gates




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   First ofF,
 WelL then, letέΑβs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 have a careful
 get into todayέΑβs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 loOk at these!!
   main topic.



                                                                                                                                                                                                 This is an extremely important
     DonέΑβt bring bugs                                                                                                                                                                            electronic component calLed
     into restaurants!!                                                                                                                                                                            an integrated circuit (IC).




                                                                                                  TheyέΑβre
                                                                                                 not bugs!




        TheyέΑβre inside many                                                                                                                  Long time no seE!
     difFerent electronics...




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Even CPUs are just
                                                                                                                                                                                                               very advanced and
                                                                                                                                                                                                             complicated integrated
48   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    circuits.
         έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                                                                     TheyέΑβre calLed pins and
                                                                                                                                                                     are the paths in and out
   Even so, this bug...                                                                                                                                                   of the circuit.
this IC... sure has a lot
   of silvery legs...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pin




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Digital electronic
                                                                                                                                                                                                           signals transmitTed as 1S
                                                                                                                                                                                                         and 0S (high and low voltage)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          pasS through these pins as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                input and output.



Oh, so theyέΑβre
   not just                                                   And hereέΑβs the
 decorations                                                 important part!                                                                                                          Logical
     then.                                                                                                                                                                           operations!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Wow     !!




                                                                                                                                                      Lo and behold! Inside, the circuit
                                                                                                                                                      performs logical operations on
                                                                                                                                                      the 1S and 0S on the input pins and
                                                                                                                                                     produces the apPropriate 1S and 0S
                                                                                                                                                              on the output pins!!



      Logical                                                                        No, IέΑβve decided to                                                                                                                          ThereέΑβs no neEd to
 operations...? That                                                                                                                                                                                                               get so defensive
 seEms even more
                                                                                      think logicalLy,
                                                                                      so thatέΑβlL make                                                                                                                              about it. logical
 complicated than                                                                                                                                                                                                                operations are realLy
  those arithmetic                                                                     understanding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  simple and easy to
    operations...                                                                     them a breEze!!                                                                                                                                 understand.




                                                                                                             ...I think?


                                                                                                                                                                                                             What Are Logical Operations?                                                     49
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




First, I want you to get
 the general idea. The
inside of an integrated
circuit loOk something
         like this...



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    scrit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ch
                                                                                                                          This is a labeled diagram
                                                                                                                          of the inside of this chip.                                                                                                                 Pins




                                                                                            This is a 74LS08
                                                                                          integrated circuit.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  scritch




  HmM. Yeah, I can                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Now letέΑβs focus
seE that there are                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        on one of those
four symbols that                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            symbols.
  loOk the same,
 and they seEm to
 be conNected to
 threE pins each...




           Pins
                                                                                                                                  LoOking closely,
                                                                                                                               you can seE that they
                                                                                                                               each have two inputs
                                                                                                                              and one output. We calL
                                                                                                                                each of these pins a
                                                                                                                                    logic gate.
                                                              AtTention!




        Input A
                                                                                                      Output
         Input B



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I seE, so that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      means... LoOk at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          next part!

50   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
           έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




Each logic gate
  is like a magic
 box where you
get some output                                                                            Input A
if you put things
                                                                                                                                                                       Logic gate                                                                              Output Z
 into the inputs!
                                                                                           Input B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Each input and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    the output can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   either be 1 or 0.




          And the inputs and
           outputs are, of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Yeah, thatέΑβs
          course, 1S and 0S...                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            right.
                yeah.


  The Three Basic Logic Gates
  (AND, OR, and NOT)
                                                                                                                                                                                               Among the logic gates, the
    Then let me use                                                                                                                                                                            most basic 1S are these: the
    your magic box                                                                                                                                                                              AND gate, the OR gate, and
  analogy as we get                                                                                                                                                                                   the NOT gate.
  into the specifics.




                                                                                                                                                                                                DonέΑβt worRy,
   Memorize alL of
                                                                                                                                                                                           these gatesέΑβ rules are
   them together!!
                                                                                                                                                                                               realLy simple.




                                                                       AlL of them??
                                                                          Is this a                                                                                                                                                                                     Just think of
                                                                        boOtcamp?!                                                                                                                                                                                     it like an oral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             exam!
                 έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




  LetέΑβs asSume that one
  means a pasS and zero                                                                                                                                                                                  PasS
 means a fail in this case.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fail

                                                                                                                                     PasS

                           And that the inputs
                          are represented by
                         two interviewers who
                         can give either a pasS
                                or a fail.




                                                                                                                                                                                 Huh...



                                                                                                                                                                     In the case of an AND gate, the
                                                                                                                                                                     output wilL only be a 1 (pasS) if
                                                                                                                                                                       both inputs are 1S (pasSes). If
                                                                                                                                                                     either input or both are 0 (fail),
                                                                                                                                                                           the output wilL also
                                                                                                                                                                                be a 0 (fail).




           So if both donέΑβt give
            a pasS, the result
              wilL be a fail...



  For an OR gate, itέΑβs
enough if at least one
 of the inputs is a one
 (pasS) for the output
   to be a one (pasS).




                                                                                                                                                  So if even a single
                                                                                                                                                 input gives a pasS, it
                                                                                                                                                  means you pasSed...
                                                                                                                                                    what a relief...
52   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
          έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




  The NOT gate wilL flip the
   input. So an input of one
 (pasS) wilL give the output
           zero (fail).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RealLy?? So it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  always completely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    disregards the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     interviewerέΑβs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        opinion?!


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IέΑβm stilL shocked by that
 έΑοwelL yeah, itέΑβs                                                                                                                                                                                                      last NOT gate. I wonder
 just how logic                                                                                                                                                                                                       how the interviewer must
  gates work.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 be feEling...

   But the important part is
   that you understand that
 even with the same input, AND
  and OR gates can produce
      difFerent outputs.


Truth Tables and
Venn Diagrams                                                                                                                                                                                 Hah! I have something
                                                                                                                                                                                               I want to show you!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WhipέΑΦ




  But there are even more
 patTerns, right? Like where
   both inputs are 0S (fail)                                                                                                                                                   A truth table spanNing
 and so on. In those cases,                                                                                                                                                    alL posSible patTerns!!
   the output would stilL                                                                                                                                                      ItέΑβs a table containing
 have to be a 0 (fail), right...                                                                                                                                              alL posSible input/output
   Just thinking about it is                                                                                                                                                        combinations!
    making me depresSed...


                                                                                                                                                                                                              What Are Logical Operations?                                                        53
                 έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη    έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




          This is it!                                                                                                 Truth table for
         Burn it into                                                                                                   the AND gate
         your mind!!!
                                                                                                                                  Input                               Output



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  If both A and B are 0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the output is 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  If A is 1 and B is 0,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the output is 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  If A is 0 and B is 1,
                                             SwatέΑΦ                                                                                                                                                                the output is 0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  If A and B are both 1,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the output is 1.




                                                                                                                                                                                                        OoOh! You can seE alL the
                                                                                                                                                                                                      input and output posSibilities.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           thatέΑβs super useful!!




                                             Also, when thinking                                                                                                       Yes, but the important
                                             about logic gates,                                                                                                       thing here is that these
                                             VenN diagrams are                                                                                                        VenN diagrams ilLustrate
                                                realLy handy.                                                                                                                two states.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The area inside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   this rectangle is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  world that consists
                                                                         Oh, I remember                                                                                                                                                             only of regions
                                                                          those from                                                                                                                                                              without color (0) or
                                                                          junior high.                                                                                                                                                            with color (1), okay?


                                                                               In this example, there
       So using VenN                                                          is only color (1) where                                                                                              ThatέΑβs right.
     diagrams, we can                                                             A and B intersect.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Then letέΑβs use
      visualize the 1S                                                                                                                                                                             this to take
        and 0S. Nice!                                                                                                                                                                             a loOk at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                   threE logic
                                                                                                                                                                                                   gates again
                                                                                                                                                                                                   alL at once,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    shalL we?


                                                                      The area inside the
                                                                     rectangle is a world
                                                                       of only 1S and 0S.



54   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
    έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                 A Summary of the AND, OR, and NOT Gates



                LetέΑβs summarize the first three basic gates. LetέΑβs look at the symbols, truth tables, and
                Venn diagrams as sets!



                                                     AND gate (Logic intersection gate)


            Symbol                                                                                                       Truth table                                                                                                     VenN diagram




Inputs                                               Output




 AND gates output 1 only when both inputs are 1 and are sometimes expressed in equa-
 tion form as Z = A ┬╖ B. The symbols used to represent AND are those for logical intersec-
 tions: ┬╕ or ┬Γ.




                                                                             OR gate (Logic union gate)


            Symbol                                                                                                       Truth table                                                                                                     VenN diagram




Inputs                                               Output




 OR gates output 1 when either input is 1 and are sometimes expressed in equation form
 as Z = A + B. The symbols used to represent OR are those for logical unions: + or ┬Δ.




                                                                                                                                                                                                         What Are Logical Operations?                                                55
                έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                            NOT gate (Logic negation gate)


               Symbol                                                                                               Truth table                                                                                                     VenN diagram




     Input                                  Output




       NOT gates output 0 only when the input is 1 and are sometimes expressed in equation
                   έΙΤ
       form as Z = A . The symbol used to represent NOT is the one for logical negation (comple-
             έΙΤ
       ment): .


                                                                                                                           This white circle
                                                                                                                        indicates that 0 and 1
                                                                                                                          should be flipPed!



                                                                   έΙΤ
               Ohh! So you can also write them as A ┬╕ B, A + B, or A . I think I understand all these forms
               now.


               Okay. Be extra careful about this though! In the examples here, we showed AND and OR
               gates having only the two inputs A and B, but itέΑβs not uncommon for these gates to have
               three or more inputs.


                                                                                    Sometimes
                                                                                    more than
                                                                                      threE!


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Signal
                                                                                                                                                                                                    pathways


                    In these cases, we require that all inputs of the AND gate be 1 for the output to be 1.
               In the case of OR gates, we require that at least one input be 1 for the output to be 1.



               So these input and output lines are called signals and can either be a 1 or 0. ThatέΑβs easy to
               remember.



56 Chapter 2   Digital Operations
            έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




     Other Basic Gates (NAND, NOR, and XOR)



    Okay, letέΑβs take a
   loOk at NAND, NOR,
  and XOR* gates next.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WHAT?!


* XOR is writTen as EOR or EXOR in some cases.


                                                                                                                                                            YouέΑβre just going to
 You just said that AND, OR,                                                                                                                                 take that back? Liar!
  and NOT were the threE                                                                                                                                    ThereέΑβs even more of
       basic gates...                                                                                                                                               them?!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Stop whining
      TotTer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  and calm
             ing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               down!!




  You should know                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Even more
   about NAND, NOR,                                                                                                                Something                                                                                                                                zealous than
    and XOR toO.                                                                                                                 youέΑβlL realize                                                                                                                                usual!
                                                                                                                                after you learn
                                                                                                                                  about them!!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LetέΑβs do it!




                             And the
                            reason is...



                                                                                                                                                                                                                What Are Logical Operations?                                                         57
                  έεΒ   έεΓ    έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                           A Summary of the NAND, NOR, and XOR Gates



                 Okay, letέΑβs talk about the other basic gates. Actually, these gates are really just
                 combinations of AND, OR, and NOT gates!


                          NAND gate (Logic intersection complement gate)


                 Symbol                                                                                                Truth table                                                                                                     VenN diagram




      Input                                    Output




                                                                                                                       The same!




        The NAND gate is an AND gate wired to a NOT gate. The NAND gateέΑβs output is therefore
        the output of an AND gate run through a NOT (negation) gate. ItέΑβs sometimes written as
        the equation Z = A ┬╕ B .



                                           NOR gate (Logic union complement gate)


                 Symbol                                                                                                Truth table                                                                                                     VenN diagram




      Input                                    Output




58   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
    έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                                     Output




 The NOR gate is an OR gate wired to a NOT gate. The NOR gateέΑβs output is therefore the
 output of an OR gate run through a NOT (negation) gate. ItέΑβs sometimes written as the
 equation Z = A  B .




                                                 XOR gate (Exclusive logic union gate)


            Symbol                                                                                                       Truth table                                                                                                     VenN diagram




Input                                                Output




                                                                                 The same!




 XOR gates output 1 only when the inputs A and B are different. Such a gate is sometimes
 written as the equation Z = A ┬Α B.

 The XOR gateέΑβs function is shown in the schematic above, where you see a combination
 of AND, OR, and NOT gates. The X in XOR stands for exclusive.




                Oho! You were right. These gates really are just combinations of basic gates.



                                                                                                                                                                                                         What Are Logical Operations?                                                59
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                          De MorganέΑβs laws




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oh-




                 This might be kind of off topic, but donέΑβt you feel a certain fascination whenever you hear
                 the word theorem or law? ItέΑβs so charming and cool, I canέΑβt help but feel my heart throb
                 wistfully every time... Well, let me tell you about an important theorem! Here it is! De Mor-
                 ganέΑβs indispensable laws for logical operations.


                                                                                                                  De MorganέΑβs Theorem




                 Aah, I might have eaten a little bit too much today. But fast food can be really good some-
                 times, donέΑβt you think?



                 Stop ignoring me! Well I suppose formulas like this can look complicated at first glance...
                 LetέΑβs start with the important part. This law basically just says that you can swap AND for
                 OR operators and vice versa. Does that make it clearer?


                 Yeah! I can see that the left and right sides have big differences in how they use ┬╕ (AND)
                 and + (OR). Is it like this?




60   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ    έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                                                        De
                                                                                                                                                     MorganέΑβs
                                                                                                                                                       laws




            ThatέΑβs it! It also means that we can use De MorganέΑβs laws to show our circuits in different
            ways. Using this technique, itέΑβs easy to simplify schematics when necessary.




                                                                                         Both of these are NAND gates!




                                                                                             Both of these are NOR gates!


                                                                                                             Conversions using De MorganέΑβs laws



            But theyέΑβre completely different! ThereέΑβs really no problem even though the left and right
            side look nothing alike?



            Yeah, the expressions might be different, but their functions are the same. Since logic gates
            (digital gates) only work with 1s and 0s, everything stays logically the same even if you flip
            everything. WeέΑβre just leveraging that particular feature of the math.



            I see... Then you wonέΑβt mind if I just rewrite all of them then? This is a law I like!




                                                                                                                                                                                                         What Are Logical Operations?                                             61
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




               Circuits That Perform Arithmetic
The Addition Circuit
                                                                                                                          Tada!
     Heh, it seEms IέΑβve
     finalLy mastered
        alL the gate
         symbols...

         le
  ribB
Sc

 Sc
   ribB
          le




                                                                                                                                                                                              LoOk! Revel in my skilL!




                                                                                                                                                  SorRy about
      *Snort*                                                                                                                                        that.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         But if youέΑβre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     realLy satisfied with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  scribBles like those, then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I supPose youέΑβre stilL far
                                          Hey, thatέΑβs rude!                                                                                                                                                        from understanding the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  subtleties of logic gates.




           Logic gates arenέΑβt goOd for
         anything unlesS you make a circuit
       that actualLy does something useful!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Wha- what do you mean?!
     Swat!

62    Chapter 2   Digital Operations
        έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα    έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ    έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ    έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                                                                                        Thunder!
    Take a loOk! This is a
 circuit that actualLy does
  something worthwhile!




   Take a goOd loOk at the                                                                                                                                                                                                   !!
   magnificence of this half
        adDer circuit!!



  This is a very old,
 rudimentary circuit
          but...




                                                                                                                                                                                                             It does feEl a bit
                                                                                                                                                                                                         magnificent, alL wired up
                                                                                                                                                                                                         like that... I seE itέΑβs using
     έΑο a useful one
                                                                                                                                                                                                            AND and XOR gates!
     that performs
        adDition.



But I donέΑβt seE
how it can adD                                                                                                                                                            I wilL let you
  numbers...                                                                                                                                                            e-explain it to me!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       If you want me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to telL you, just
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           say so...
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                  The Half Adder




                 Let me explain what the half adder I showed you is all about. Even though I suspect
                 you wonέΑβt need that much explaining at this point. First off, do you remember single-bit
                 addition?


                                                                                              0 + 0 = 0, 0 + 1 = 1, 1 + 0 = 1, 1 + 1 = 10



                      If we bundle all of these together, it kind of starts to look like a truth table, doesnέΑβt it?
                 LetέΑβs treat the two bits as inputs A and B, and letέΑβs standardize our output to two digits, so
                 an output of 1 looks like 01.

                                                                                                                                                                                              output




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (The digit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  is carRied.)



                                                                                                                                                                                                  The lower digit


                 Well then, do you notice anything? Pay special attention to the gray area.



                 WhέΑΦwhat? Could it be...? The lower digit output... it looks just like an XOR gateέΑβs truth
                 table (see page 59)! XOR produces an output of 1 only if the inputs are different, right?


64   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




            ThatέΑβs correct. This time, look only at the upper output digit.


                                                                                                                                                                 output




                                                                                                                                                                                                      (The digit
                                                                                                                                                                                                     is carRied.)



                                                                                                                                                                         The upPer digit



            Hmm, that looks just like the truth table for an AND gate (see page 55)! An AND gateέΑβs
            output is 1 only when both inputs are 1. . . . That must mean . . .

                  That by combining an XOR and AND gate, we can get two outputs (one for the upper
            digit, one for the lower digit) and perform single-bit addition!


            As soon as you get that part, it seems really easy, right? The lower digit comes from output
            S, and the upper digit comes from output C. In this case, S stands for sum, and C for carry.



                                                 input
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         output                                      (The value
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S                                          of A + B)
                                                 input



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         output
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (CarRy)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C



                                                                                                                                                 Half AdDer




            This is how we can get two outputs from two inputs with the same half adder circuit. And
            this is also how we can add two bits together!




                                                                                                                                                                                             Circuits That Perform Arithmetic                                                      65
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                              Full Adder and Ripple Carry Adder




                                                                              Think of water ripPles




                 After learning how the half adder works, it seems really simple! Hmm, but, thereέΑβs still
                 something that bothers me about it.

                      In that circuit, thereέΑβs an output for the carry, but thereέΑβs no input for the carry from
                 the previous digit. That means you can only ever add two single digits, right? That doesnέΑβt
                 seem very useful. In fact, only being able to add two single digits seems pretty useless!



                 Heh, an acute observation for sure. It is true that the half adder cannot deal with carries
                 from previous digits and can therefore only ever add two single bits. ThatέΑβs why half adders
                 are just that, έΑεhalf an adder.έΑζ ItέΑβs no use putting it down for something it canέΑβt help.




                 IέΑβm not dissing anyone! Why am I the bad guy all of a sudden?!



                 DonέΑβt underestimate the half adder though! Actually, using two half adders, you can make a
                 full adder. In addition to having the inputs A and B, you can use an additional input for the
                 carry in this circuit.

                      Take a look at this next schematic. We call this circuit with three inputs and two
                 outputs a full adder. WeέΑβll put each half adder into its own box to make the diagram a bit
                 easier to understand.




66   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                 Half adDer                                                                  Half adDer


                 ThreE
                 inputs




                                                                                                                                                 FulL adDer



            You were right, itέΑβs using two half adders! Two halves really make a whole. I guess Cin is the
            carry input and Cout is the carry output then.


            ThatέΑβs right. And by connecting several of these full adders together, we can add any num-
            ber of bits! We call a circuit like this a ripple carry adder.

                  In this example, weέΑβre using four adders, so we can add four digits. WeέΑβve also put the
            full adders into their own boxes. During subtraction, we would deal with the inverse carry
            instead (borrow).


                                 The carRies are being propagated




                         Half adDer


                                                                                                         FulL adDer                                                                  FulL adDer                                                                  FulL adDer




                                                                                                                             RipPle carRy adDer



            Uh-huh. So each adderέΑβs output carry goes into the next adderέΑβs input carry. This is how
            the carry flows so that weέΑβre able to do the calculation properly.




                                                                                                                                                                                             Circuits That Perform Arithmetic 67
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ    έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη    έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




           The Ripple Carry Adder and Carry Look-ahead Adder



                 But even then... that ripple carry adder kind of makes me feel a sense of fellowship with
                 how it moves the carry after each step in the calculation. ItέΑβs really similar to how we
                 humans do calculations on pen and paper, moving the carry from each lower place value to
                 the next higher place value.


                 Yeah. But thatέΑβs actually a big problemέΑΦit takes a lot of time to keep moving the carry from
                 each calculation to the next.

                     In ripple carry adders, the more digits there are, the slower the calculation speed will
                 be because of the larger propagation delay.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   UpPer digit

                                                                                                                                       Okay,
                                                      Here! A                                                                         roger                                                  StilL
                                                      carRy!                                                                           that!                                               nothing...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IέΑβm so bored...




                                                                                                          CarRy propagation delay...


                                                                                                      An artistic impresSion of a
                                                                                                          ripPle carRy adDer



                 Yeah, that seems a bit slow... Addition and subtraction are pretty common too, so I suppose
                 theyέΑβre not something you want to be doing slowly. Hmm. So what do we do about it?!




68   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




            Heh heh heh. To fix this problem, someone came up with what is known as a carry look-
            ahead adder.

                  It basically delegates the carry calculations to a completely different circuit that serves
            its results to each digitέΑβs adder. Using this method, the upper digits can do their calculations
            right away, without having to wait!



                                                                                                  The circuit that deals
                                                                                                       with carRies                                                                                                                  UpPer digit
                                                                                                 (LoOkahead-carRy unit)




                                                                     They donέΑβt have to wait for the carRy!



                                                                                                     An artistic impresSion of a
                                                                                                      carRy loOk-ahead adDer




            Eeeh, is that even possible? So thereέΑβs some other dedicated circuit that decides whether or
            not thereέΑβs a carry?



            Yeah. It determines whether there is a carry in either direction during addition and sub-
            traction. The downside is that the circuit is a lot bigger, but calculation times are drastically
            reduced.


            Hmm. So itέΑβs reducing calculation times with all kinds of smart tricks then. When we first
            talked about making a circuit for addition, I was imagining something pretty small, but the
            final product is quite impressive.




                                                                                                                                                                                             Circuits That Perform Arithmetic                                                    69
                 έεΒ   έεΓ    έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ    έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ    έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                  Circuits That Remember
     Circuits with Memory
     Are a Necessity!                                                                                                     O-kay... this memory has
                                                                                                                          to be the same memory
   Now, letέΑβs get                                                                                                          we talked about last
 into todayέΑβs last                                                                                                               time, right?
       topic.




                         LetέΑβs talk about
                           circuits with
                             memory.



      Back then, you                                                                                                                                                                                                             Hm, yeah. ItέΑβs true
       showed me                                                              Memory!                                                                 Data and                                                                   that when we say
                                                                                                                                                     program
      these things...                                                                                                                              instructions,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               έΑεmemory,έΑζ we usualLy
      (SeE page 18.)                                                                                                                              among other                                                                  mean primary memory
                                                                                                                                                  things used in
                                                                                                                                                    operations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      like this.




        But, thereέΑβs                                                                              And this storage is calLed
      actualLy memory                                                                                     registers!!
     storage inside the
        CPU as welL.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ry!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M em o                                               Registers




70   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
       έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ    έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




Registers?                                                                                                                                         A simple analogy
                                                                                                                                                 for registers might
Never heard
                                                                                                                                                 be something like a
  of έΑαem.                                                                                                                                      disposable scratch pad.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    When performing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      operations,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     registers are
    What are those                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   used to store
       things?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         temporary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         values!




This kind of memory
is more short-term
than other types of
       memory.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 So there are many
                                                                                                                                                                                                               types of memory, each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                made for a specific
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       task.




  WelL, the important thing with
   alL of them is that by using
    them, we are able to use
  previous memory (the state) in
        future operations.




                                                                                                                                                                                         Could you...
                                                                                                                                                                                       say that again in
                                                                                                                                                                                       plain language,
                                                                                                                                                                                           please?




    That is, previous memories
        can afFect future
       calculation outputs!!

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Circuits That Remember 71
                 έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε    έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




     Okay, then imagine...                                                                                       Yay! IέΑβlL have a coke!!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FulLy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 motivated!!




      That you are about
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hey, weέΑβre talking
     to buy a drink from a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          hypotheticalLy here!
       vending machine.



      To buy a 130-yen cola, you
     first have to put 100 yen in,
     then 50 yen... after that, the
       machine should display a
       total of 150 yen, right?




                                                                          That just means that the
                                                                         machine remembers the sum
                                                                          of the 100 yen you put in
                                                                         before and the 50 yen you
                                                                             inserted just now.




  What do you think? Do                                                                                                                                                                              Ah, it seEms very obvious
 you understand how the                                                                                                                                                                              now. The reason why itέΑβs
 previous memory of 100                                                                                                                                                                                able to show the sum
  yen afFected the end                                                                                                                                                                                of 150 yen is that it has
   result of 150 yen?                                                                                                                                                                                          memory.




72   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
               έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη    έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




If it didnέΑβt have                                                                                                                                                                                                 What a rip-ofF! IέΑβd
 any memory...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                have no choice but to
                                                       Not that I recalL...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     destroy it!!
             I
        n έΑβt
   Did put
        t
   j u s n i n??
     0  ye
  10




    Wha-at!!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Calm down,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    violence solves
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nothing!



                                                                                                                                                                                                          They reuse results from
          Comparing curRent memory                                                                                                                                                                         previous calculations
               to past memory                                                                                                                                                                            together with new data as
                                                                                                                                                                                                        input to other calculations.

         I sold 3 today > I sold 2
       yesterday. This means I sold                                                                                                                                                                 IέΑβve sold 6 up until
       more today than yesterday.                                                                                                                                                                   yesterday + I sold
                                                                                                                                                                                                    3 today = IέΑβve sold
                                                                                                                                                                                                         9 in total.

                                                                       ApPle                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ya-y!




    This is why computers,
such as the one in the vending                                                                                                                                                                                                           Many program
machine, neEd to have memory                                                                                                                                                                                                            instructions are
    circuits to be useful.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  like this.



I seE. I guesS it makes                                                                                             ...Now that thatέΑβs
  sense that memory                                                                                                   setTled, I think
circuits are important                                                                                               IέΑβlL go and have
          then.                                                                                                        another cola.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        She got thirsty?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         The power of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sugGestion...


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Circuits That Remember 73
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                              Flip-flop, the Basics of Memory Circuits



                 Ngh. I canέΑβt even imagine a circuit that has memory. Even human memory is really compli-
                 cated you know...



                 Yeah. You have to think really simple. Computers can only use 1s and 0s right? That means
                 that memory to a computer means somehow storing the states of 1s and 0s.

                      IέΑβve already explained that these 1s and 0s actually correspond to different voltage
                 levels (low and high) (see page 37). This means that to save a 1, we would have to create
                 something that can retain that state over a longer period of time, as in the graph below.
                 We call storing data like this latching.



                                                                              State remains 1                                                                                                                                                                                                       So this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  is a latch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     then!



                                                                                                                                  Time




                 I see. But itέΑβs probably not very useful if it just stays in that state forever... What if I want it
                 to go back to 0 later on or I want to overwrite the memory with something else? WouldnέΑβt
                 it make sense to be able to store whatever I want, whenever I want?


                 Yeah, thatέΑβs right! For example, if you turned a roomέΑβs light switch on, it would stay that
                 way until someone turned it off again, and then it would stay off until someone turned it
                 off again. It would be great if we could create some kind of trigger condition to freely swap
                 between the 1 and 0 states, just as we do with the light switch.

                       That is, we would like to be able to store 1s and 0s indefinitely while still being able to
                 flip each bit individually whenever we want. This is exactly what memory circuits do!




74   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη    έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




            Uhm, that sounds a bit selfish, doesnέΑβt it? I want to store 1s and 0s, but I also want to be
            able to flip them at will.


            It is selfish, but flip-flop circuits grant us the ability to change states! Flip-flops are a basic
            component of any memory circuit.




            Flip-flop...? ThatέΑβs a cute name, but how are they useful?




            TheyέΑβre super useful!! First take a look at the picture below. To make it easier to under-
            stand, IέΑβve put the flip-flop in its own box. Using one of these, we can store one bit of data.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Important!



                                                                                             Inputs                                                                                                                              Outputs




                The reason why there are no concrete symbols for the inputs is that they change
            depending on the type of flip-flop we use.


                                                                 έΙΤ
            O-kay. There are inputs. . . . And two outputs Q and Q . . . .



            Yes. Pay special attention to the Q output! This is the output that will stay either 1 or 0. Q
                                          έΙΤ                       έΙΤ            έΙΤ
            will always be the inverse of Q . So, if Q is 1, then Q will be 0. Q can be very useful to have
            when designing a circuit, but weέΑβre going to ignore it for now.



            Uh-huh. Then, how does it work? Tell me whatέΑβs inside that box!



            All in good time. First off, there are several types of flip-flops. Both the function and circuit
            depend on this type. Out of these, IέΑβll teach you about RS flip-flops, D flip-flops, and T
            flip-flops.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Circuits That Remember 75
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                              The RS Flip-flop



                 Okay, I guess RS flip-flops come first? So the box has two input signals, R and S. Rice...
                 Sushi... Rice and sushi?!



                                                                                                                                                                                          TheyέΑβre also sometimes
                                                                                                                                                                                             calLed RS latches.


                                                                                                                                                                                              You can also flip the
                                                                                                                                                                                              R and S and calL them
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SR flip-flops.




                 Um, no. R means reset and S means set. The reset and set inputs are the two main fea-
                 tures of this type of circuit.

                      I might be giving away the main point too quickly here, but setting S to 1 will set Q to
                 1 and setting R to 1 will reset Q to 0. Once Q has changed state, removing the input signal
                 wonέΑβt change it back. It will keep that state until the countersignal (S for R and vice versa) is
                 sent. As soon as that happens it will, of course, flip the saved state back though.



                 Hmm, so that means that it remembers which of the two got set to 1 last? If S got set
                 to 1 most recently, then the latch remembers 1, and if R was the last 1, it remembers 0!
                 Is that it?


                 Yeah. It might seem a bit complicated here, but the circuit looks like the figure on the next
                 page. In accordance with De MorganέΑβs laws (see page 60), it can be created using either
                 NAND gates or NOR gates.



                 Whoa. It looks a bit weird... There are two NAND gates (or NOR gates), but theyέΑβre all
                 tangled up in figure eights.



                 Yep! The two circuits are interconnected with the output of one acting as one of the inputs
                 to the other.




76   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ    έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ    έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                                                                                             RS flip-flop



                 Inputs                                      Outputs                                                              Function


                                                             Does not                                                          Retains its
                                                              change                                                         curRent output
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Note that S and
                                                                                                                                                   Set                                                                          R have negation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           symbols! This is calLed
                                                                                                                                                  Reset                                                                    active-low, and it means
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           they are activated when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the input voltage is
                                                                                                                              Not alLowed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              low (0) instead of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    high (1).



            ItέΑβs thanks to this figure eight that the circuit is able to retain either a 1 or a 0. We call
            this a latch. You could say that this figure eight is the most important characteristic of a
            memory circuit!


            Hmm, even so, itέΑβs pretty complex. If I look back and forth between the schematic and the
            truth table, I get the feeling I kind of get it, but still...
                 LetέΑβs see, the part of the truth table that says έΑεdoes not changeέΑζ means that output Q
            either stays a 1 or a 0 indefinitely, right? But what does the έΑεnot allowedέΑζ on the bottom
            mean? WhatέΑβs not allowed?!


            Ah, yeah. That just means that you are not allowed to trigger both set and reset at the
            same time. Remember that since the circuit is active-low, this means that both outputs
            canέΑβt be 0 at the same time. If you were to set both to 0, this would make both Q and
            έΙΤ
            Q output 1 until you changed one of them backέΑΦbut the outputs are always supposed to
            be either 0 and 1, or 1 and 0. ItέΑβs not allowed to invalidate the rules we set for this logic
            circuit.


            Oh, I see. So just follow the traffic, er, circuit rules, right?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Circuits That Remember 77
                έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                    The D Flip-flop and the Clock



               LetέΑβs see. The next one is the D flip-flop, I think. The inputs are D and... whatέΑβs this triangle
               next to the C?! It looks like that piece of cloth Japanese ghosts wear on their headbands!!




                                           An edge is when a signal
                                        transitions betweEn two levels
                                             (0 and 1 for example).



               That observation is pretty far removed from the computer world. But I suppose itέΑβs a bit
               cryptic and warrants an explanation. First off, itέΑβs easiest to think of the D as being for
               data. That triangle is the symbol for a rising edge, and the C stands for clock.




               Um... Rising edge?? And the clockέΑΦis that just a normal clock?




               ThatέΑβs right! Computers need some kind of fixed-interval digital signal to synchronize all
               the operational states in their circuits. ThatέΑβs what the clock does!

                     Just like a normal clock measuring time, it flips between high and low voltage (1
               and 0) in fixed intervals. It has nothing to do with the circuitέΑβs input or output thoughέΑΦ
               itέΑβs completely separate.




                                                                                                        Time




                                                                                                                                        A clock




78 Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




            Hmm. It really reminds me of a clock... Ticktock, ticktock... Just like we plan our days with
            the help of clocks, I guess circuits need them, too.


            Yeah. When a circuit needs to take some action, the clock can sometimes act as its cue.
            And inside the clock, what is known as the rising edge acts as that action signal. Have
            a look!




            Ohh! Those arrows are at even intervals on the clock graph.



            When the clock goes from low to high (0 to 1), we see a rising edge, and when it goes back
            from high to low (1 to 0), we see a falling edge.



                                                                                 Rising edge                                                                                                     FalLing edge




                                                             When the clock goes                                                                                                     When the clock goes
                                                              from low to high                                                                                                        from high to low




            Oho, I think I get it. So the rising and falling edges are like ringing bells on the clock, right?
            When the bell rings, it acts like a signal to take action. Like at the start and end of class, for
            example.



            ThatέΑβs just it! ThatέΑβs a pretty good analogy coming from you.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Circuits That Remember 79
                  έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                 Okay, letέΑβs get back to the problem. In a D flip-flop, every time a rising edge passes, the
                 input 1 or 0 at the D input is copied directly to the output Q.


                      It might be easier to understand by looking at the timing diagram below. A timing
                 diagram is a good way to see how signals change their state over time.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Copy!
                      Clock




                              The important lesson here is that the input D can change as much as it wants,
                              but Q wonέΑβt change until a rising edge arrives!




                 Mmmh. ItέΑβs a bit complicated, but I think I get it now that IέΑβve looked over the timing
                 diagram. In any case, the main characteristic of the D flip-flop seems to be that it acts in
                 sync with the clockέΑβs rising edges! Hmm, it seems like clocks are super important both to
                 modern man and circuits.




80   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                                                         The T Flip-flop and Counters




            So the last one is the T flip-flop? Wait, it only has one input! Did you forget to draw
            the rest?




            Fuhahaha! Like I would ever forget! The T flip-flop only has one input, as you can see, and
            is pretty simple. Whenever the input T changes from 0 to 1, or 1 to 0, the output stored in
            Q flips state. It looks something like this time chart.




                             Input T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   There are T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 flip-flops that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 activate just on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  falLing edges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 instead (1 to 0).
                         Output Q

                                                                                                     Flip                                        Flip                                    Flip



            Oh, this was super easy to understand! ItέΑβs a memory circuit even though it has only one
            input.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Circuits That Remember                          81
                  έεΒ   έεΓ    έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




                 By the way, flipping between 1 and 0 is called toggling. The T in T flip-flop actually stands
                 for toggle! Also, by connecting several T flip-flops together as in the schematic below, you
                 can make a circuit that can countέΑΦa counter circuit.




                          Input



                                                                This circuit shows how several T flip-flops
                                                               togGled by the falLing edge of an input signal
                                                                             can act as a counter.


                                                                                                                                   Counter circuits


                      The first flip-flop will toggle its output state every time the input on the far left
                 changes from high to low. Consequently, the second flip-flop will toggle its output when-
                 ever the first flip-flopέΑβs output changes from high to low. All following outputs will keep
                 toggling in this pattern. If the input signal is connected to a clock, then each flip-flop in
                 the series will toggle every 2(n έΙΤ 1) clock cycles if n is the flip-flopέΑβs position in the series. Put
                 another way, the period of each flip-flopέΑβs output signal will be 2n of the original signalέΑβs
                 period. Counters that work this way are called asynchronous counters, since not all flip-
                 flops are connected to the same clock but, instead, each flip-flopέΑβs clock after the first is
                 the output signal of the flip-flop that came before. In contrast, there is a circuit commonly
                 found in CPUs called a synchronous counter. As the name here implies, all flip-flops in this
                 type of counter trigger on the signal from the same clock, meaning they all toggle at the
                 same time, in parallel. ItέΑβs worth mentioning that IέΑβve simplified these descriptions to make
                 them easier to understand.



                 Umm, but why do we say that the circuit can count?



                 Looking at the time chart, do you see that each output signal has half as many toggles as
                 its input signal? This means that the period of the output signals is twice as long as the
                 period of the input signals. IέΑβve put all three of the flip-flops in the schematic above into
                 this time chart so you can see all of their individual outputs next to each other when they
                 are connected.

                      If you look at each column in this graph individually, you should see that the digits from
                 Q2, Q 1, and Q0 form binary numbers! IsnέΑβt it cool that every time we have a falling edge on
                 the input of the first T flip-flop, this binary number increases by 1? ItέΑβs counting!



82   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ    έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη    έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




            Wow, youέΑβre right! Q2 corresponds to the 22 digit, Q 1 to 2 1, and Q0 to 20, right?

                If you look at Q2, Q 1, and Q0 in order, the first column forms 000 (the number 0), the
            second one 001 (1), the third 010 (2), and the fourth 011 (3) in binary. So using this tech-
            nique, you can actually make the circuit count! ThatέΑβs a really smart design.


            Yeah. In this example, we used three flip-flops, so that lets us express 23 (8) numbers,
            meaning we can count from zero to seven.

                You can actually make counters from other types of flip-flops, like D flip-flops, for
            example. Using some other tricks, you can also make circuits that count down if you want.



            Oh, that seems like it could be really useful for a lot of things.




            Yeah, well thatέΑβs it for flip-flops. Just donέΑβt forget what I said at the start, that flip-flops are
            the foundation of any memory circuit!

                This means that both primary memory and CPU registers use flip-flops at their core.
            And flip-flops are also the basis of any counter circuit, just like what we just talked about.



            Haha, so theyέΑβre the base for a lot of different devices, basically. And even though they have
            a cute name, theyέΑβre super useful circuits we canέΑβt do without!



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Circuits That Remember 83
                 έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




Thanks for today!                                                                                                                                            Heh, welL the things
 I learned a lot!                                                                                                                                              we talked about
                                                                                                                                                             today are stilL just
                                                                                                                                                                  the basics.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DonέΑβt forget
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 them, though.




      DonέΑβt worRy!! ThereέΑβs no                                                                                                                                                                               Exceptional
       way that someone with                                                                                                                                                                                 memory, huh...
      my exceptional memory
       and intelLigence would
          forget anything!




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              So that means that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             you remember every
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               shogi opPonent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              youέΑβve ever played
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     then?



                                     WelLlLlL, you                                                                                                                                   ...you felL right into
                                     know, itέΑβs like,                                                                                                                                   that one, wow......
                                         seE...




                         ItέΑβs not like the heroine                                                                                                                                                                                   I-I canέΑβt help it if I
                         of the story remembers                                                                                                                                                                                       donέΑβt remember!!!!
                           every slimebalL sheέΑβs
                               slain, right...?

84   Chapter 2   Digital Operations
      έεΒ   έεΓ   έεΕ   έαΟ   έεΗ   έεζ   έαΟ   έεη   έεθ   έει   έεκ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαη   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΟ   έεΞ   έαη   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έαη   έεΞ   έεΠ   έεΣ   έεΤ   έαΟ   έεΞ   έεΥ   έεΦ   έεΧ   έεΝ   έεΝ   έεΓ   έεΠ   έεΠ   έεΨ   έεΩ   έεα   έεβ   έεγ   έεδ   έεε   έελ   έεΦ   έεΕ   έει   έεΝ   έεΒ   έει   έαη   έεμ   έεΒ   έει   έελ   έεθ   έεΦ   έαΟ   έεΓ   έαδ   έαΟ   έεΥ   έεν




Circuit Design Today (CAD and FPGA)
                      Multipurpose integrated circuit design is surprisingly similar to software development
                      these days. ItέΑβs usually accomplished using a hardware description language (HDL) to
                      define the operation of a circuit.
                            In the past, circuits were drawn using logical circuit symbols, much like the 1s we
                      have shown in this book, but these symbols are now used mostly just for very simple cir-
                      cuits. The development of computer-aided design (CAD) programs allows people to design
                      complicated circuits with relative ease.
                            But, itέΑβs important to learn the basics since it can be useful to know these sym-
                      bols when trying to figure out how data flows through a digital circuit or when trying to
                      understand a particular feature of some schematic.
                            At the dawn of CPU development, it was common to create reference circuits con-
                      sisting of many AND, OR, and NOT gates. These were then used when iterating, proto-
                      typing, and evaluating new generations of CPUs and other ICs.
                            By doing this, it was possible to test each function of the advanced circuit individually
                      and even hardwire the circuits together to try to work out problems in the design if some
                      error was detected.
                            Nowadays, reference circuits like these are rarely used in development. Instead
                      much more flexible field-programmable gate array (FPGA) circuits are preferred.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Awesome,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IέΑβm going
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to tailor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      this to my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        neEds!




                                                                                                                                                                  CK
                                                                                                                                                      CLA
                                                                                                                                                          CK
                                                                                                                                              CLA

                                               FPGAs can, just as the name sugGests, be reprogramMed
                                              έΑεin the fieldέΑζ to change the function of the IC completely.
                                                       They are indispensable to circuit designers.

                           FPGAs consist of a series of logic blocks, which can be wired together in different
                      ways depending on the programming. Some of these blocks contain lookup tables to map
                      the usually available 4έΑΥ6 bits of input to output in a truth tableέΑΥlike format. The number
                      of lookup tables in an FPGA can range anywhere from a couple of hundred to more than
                      several millions, depending on the FPGA model.
                           And of course, itέΑβs possible to reprogram all of the tables whenever needed. In this
                      way, the same FPGA circuit can be used to perform the functions of many different types
                      of ICs. You can simulate the function of a CPU using an FPGA if you want to, but itέΑβs a
                      lot cheaper and easier to mass-produce a dedicated circuit instead. Even so, since the
                      price of FPGAs is dropping and development costs for new ICs are high, if the life span or
                      projected sales of a particular IC are not high enough, it might be more cost-effective to
                      simply use an FPGA.

                                                                                                                                                                                          Circuit Design Today (CAD and FPGA) 85
