wgc2_OB_title.fm Page i Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:27 PM




                                                              fro m


                                       WRITE GREAT CODE
                V ol um e 2 : T hi nk in g Low -Lev el , W r i t in g Hi gh -Lev el




                            ONLINE APPENDIX B
                T h e M i n i ma l P o w er P C I n st r u c t i o n S et




                                                        b y R anda l l H yde



                                                                    ®




                                                            San Francisco
wgc2_OB_title.fm Page ii Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:27 PM




        WRITE GREAT CODE, Volume 2. Copyright © 2006 by Randall Hyde. ISBN 1-59327-065-8.

        All Rights Reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
        or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the
        prior written permission of the copyright owner and the publisher.

        No Starch Press and the No Starch Press logo are registered trademarks of No Starch Press, Inc. Other product and
        company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than use a trademark
        symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, we are using the names only in an editorial fashion and to the
        benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark.

        For information on book distributors or translations, please contact No Starch Press, Inc. directly:

        No Starch Press, Inc.
        555 De Haro Street, Suite 250, San Francisco, CA 94107
        phone: 415.863.9900; fax: 415.863.9950; info@nostarch.com; www.nostarch.com

        The information in this online appendix is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every precaution
        has been taken in the preparation of this material, neither the author nor No Starch Press, Inc. shall have any liability
        to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the
        information contained in it.

        Librar y of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data (Volume 1)

        Hyde, Randall.
          Write great code : understanding the machine / Randall Hyde.
               p. cm.
          ISBN 1-59327-003-8
        1. Computer programming. 2. Computer architecture. I. Title.
           QA76.6.H94 2004
           005.1--dc22
                                                            2003017502


        If you haven’t purchased a copy of Write Great Code, Volume 2: Thinking Low-Level, Writing High-Level and would like to
        do so, please go to www.nostarch.com.
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 1 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                                             B
                                           THE MINIMAL POWERPC
                                             INSTRUCTION SET




                                         Although the PowerPC CPU family
                                        supports hundreds of instructions, few
                                      compilers actually use all of these instruc-
                                   tions. If you’re wondering why compilers don’t
                             use more of the available instructions, the answer is
                             because many of them have become obsolete over time
                             as newer instructions have reduced the need for older instructions. Some
                             instructions, such as the PowerPC’s AltaVec instructions, simply do not
                             correspond to operations you’d normally perform in an HLL. Therefore,
                             compilers rarely generate these types of machine instructions (such instruc-
                             tions generally appear only in handwritten assembly language programs).
                             Therefore, you don’t need to learn the entire PowerPC instruction set to
                             study compiler output. Instead, you need only learn the handful of instruc-
                             tions that compilers actually emit on the PowerPC. That’s the purpose of this
                             appendix, to describe those few instructions that compilers actually use.
                                  Many PowerPC instructions take multiple forms depending on whether
                             they modify the condition-code and XER registers. An unadorned instruc-
                             tion mnemonic does not modify either register. A dot suffix (.) on certain
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 2 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                   instructions tells the CPU to update the condition-code CR0 bits based on
                                   the result of the operation. An o suffix tells the CPU to update the overflow
                                   and summary overflow bits in the XER register. Finally, an o. suffix tells the
                                   CPU to update the bits in CR0 and the XER register. The following
                                   descriptions group instructions together that differ only by these suffixes.

             B.1 add, add., addo, addo.
                                   The add instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                                   and two source registers. This instruction computes the sum of the values in
                                   the two source registers and stores the sum into the destination register.

                                   Table B-1: Gas Syntax for add

                                    Instruction                     Description
                                    add Rd, Rs1, Rs2                Rd := Rs1 + Rs2
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                    add. Rd, Rs1, Rs2               Rd := Rs1 + Rs2
                                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the sum.
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                    addo Rd, Rs1, Rs2               Rd := Rs1 + Rs2
                                                                    The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed
                                                                    overflow occurs.
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                    addo. Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 + Rs2
                                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the sum.
                                                                    The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed
                                                                    overflow occurs.
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                   Table B-2: CR0 Settings for add. and addo.

                                    Flag       Setting
                                    LT         Set if the sum (signed) is less than zero.
                                    GT         Set if the sum (signed) is greater than zero.
                                    Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                    SO         The summary overflow bit from the XER is copied to this field after computing the sum.


                                   Table B-3: XER Settings for addo and addo.

                                    Flag       Setting
                                    OV         Set if a signed overflow occurred during the execution of the instruction.
                                    SO         Set if the SO bit was previously set, or if a signed overflow occurred during the
                                               execution of the instruction.
                                    CA         Unaffected




       2    Wr it e G rea t C ode , Vo lum e 2 : T hi nk in g Low -L evel , Wr it in g Hi gh -L ev el
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 3 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.2 addi
                             The addi instruction (add immediate) adds a constant to the contents of a
                             source register and stores the sum into a destination register. The constant is
                             limited to a signed 16-bit value (which the instruction sign extends to 32 bits
                             prior to use). This instruction does not affect any flags or the overflow bit.
                                  The addi instruction treats R0 differently than the other registers. If you
                             specify R0 as the source register, the addi instruction uses the value zero
                             rather than the value held in the R0 register. In this case, the addi instruction
                             acts as a “load immediate with sign extension” instruction (because adding
                             an immediate constant with zero simply produces that constant). Though
                             the PowerPC doesn’t have an actual “load immediate” instruction, most
                             assemblers assemble the li instruction into the addi opcode.
                                  You will also discover that there is no “subtract immediate” instruction,
                             even though assemblers like Gas support that mnemonic. Gas (and other
                             PowerPC assemblers) compile a subi instruction into an addi instruction after
                             negating the immediate operand.

                             Table B-4: Gas Syntax for addi

                              Instruction                Description
                              addi Rd, Rs1, constant     Rd := Rs1 + constant
                                                         d and s1 are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.3 addis
                             The addis instruction (add immediate, shifted) shifts a 16-bit constant to the
                             left 16 bits, adds this to the value from a source register, and then stores the
                             sum into a destination register. This instruction does not affect any flags or
                             the overflow bit.
                                  The addis instruction treats R0 differently than the other registers. If you
                             specify R0 as the source register, the addi instruction uses the value zero
                             rather than the value held in the R0 register.

                             Table B-5: Gas Syntax for addis

                              Instruction                Description
                              addis Rd, Rs1, constant    Rd := Rs1 + (constant << 16)
                                                         d and s1 are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.4 and, and.
                             The and instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                             and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise)
                             AND of the two source values and places the result in the destination
                             register.



                                                                       O nl in e Ap pen di x B: Th e M in im al Pow erP C In s t ru ct ion Se t   3
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 4 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                   Table B-6: Gas Syntax for and

                                    Instruction                    Description
                                    and Rd, Rs1, Rs2               Rd := Rs1 AND Rs2
                                                                   d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                    and. Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 AND Rs2
                                                                   CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                                   d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                   Table B-7: CR0 Settings for and.

                                    Flag        Setting
                                    LT          Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                                    GT          Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                                    Zero        Set if the sum is zero.
                                    SO          Unaffected



             B.5 andc, andc.
                                   The andc instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                                   and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise)
                                   AND of the first source value with the inverted value of the second source
                                   operand and places the result in the destination register.

                                   Table B-8: Gas Syntax for andc

                                    Instruction                     Description
                                    andc Rd, Rs1, Rs2               Rd := Rs1 AND (NOT Rs2)
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                    andc. Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 AND (NOT Rs2)
                                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                   Table B-9: CR0 Settings for andc.

                                    Flag        Setting
                                    LT          Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                                    GT          Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                                    Zero        Set if the sum is zero.
                                    SO          Unaffected




       4    Wr it e G rea t C ode , Vo lum e 2 : T hi nk in g Low -L evel , Wr it in g Hi gh -L ev el
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 5 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.6 andi
                             The andi (and immediate) instruction requires two register operands and a
                             16-bit constant. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise) AND of the
                             value in the second (source) register and the constant value and places the
                             result in the first (destination) register. Note that this instruction always
                             clears the HO bits of the destination register.

                             Table B-10: Gas Syntax for andi

                              Instruction                Description
                              andi Rd, Rs, constant      Rd := Rs AND constant
                                                         d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.7 andis
                             The andis (and immediate, shifted) instruction requires two register
                             operands and a 16-bit constant. This instruction shifts the constant to the
                             left 16 bits, logically ANDs this with the value held in the source register, and
                             then places the result in the destination register. Note that this instruction
                             always clears the LO bits of the destination register.

                             Table B-11: Gas Syntax for andis

                              Instruction                Description
                              andis Rd, Rs, constant     Rd := Rs AND (constant << 16)
                                                         d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.8 Branches
                             Standard PowerPC assembly language exposes the numeric encoding of
                             the opcode in the standard branch mnemonics. If you’re reading arbitrary
                             PowerPC assembly code, you might have to memorize “magic numbers”
                             that appear in the operand field of various branch instructions. Fortunately,
                             IBM has defined a set of “mnemonic synonyms” that use English names
                             for various numeric encodings. Compilers like GCC typically use the syno-
                             nyms rather than the numeric forms. In this appendix, I’ll discuss these
                             “simplified branch mnemonics.” If you encounter weird forms of the
                             branch instructions, you may want to consult the PowerPC programmer’s
                             reference guide (i.e., PowerPC Microprocessor Family: The Programmer’s
                             Reference Guide) for their exact interpretation.
                                   The PowerPC branch instructions provide four basic addressing modes:
                             relative, absolute, indirect through LINK, and indirect through COUNT.
                             GCC doesn’t seem to use the absolute addressing mode (it’s useful mainly in
                             embedded systems where you have good control over the memory map), so
                             I’ll not consider that form here.



                                                                        O nl in e Ap pen di x B: Th e M in im al Pow erP C In s t ru ct ion Se t   5
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 6 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                   B.8.1 Unconditional Branch (b), Relative
                                   The branch relative instruction encodes a 24-bit relative displacement field
                                   as part of the opcode. The CPU shifts this 24-bit value to the left two posi-
                                   tions (producing a 26-bit value), sign extends the result to 32 bits, and then
                                   adds this displacement to the CPU’s program counter register (CIA, or
                                   current instruction address, on the PowerPC).

                                   Table B-12: Gas Syntax for b

                                    Instruction                 Description
                                    b target_address            NIA := CIA + displacement
                                                                NIA is the next instruction address.
                                                                CIA is the current instruction address.
                                                                displacement is the distance from the current instruction to the
                                                                target_address.


                                   B.8.2 Unconditional Branch and Link (bl), Relative
                                   The bl (branch and link) instruction operates almost identically to the
                                   unconditional branch instruction. The only difference is that in addition to
                                   transferring control, it also copies the address of the next instruction (after
                                   the branch) into the LINK register. Programs generally use the bl instruction
                                   to call local subroutines.

                                   Table B-13: Gas Syntax for bl

                                    Instruction                   Description
                                    bl target_address             LINK := CIA + 4
                                                                  NIA := CIA + displacement
                                                                  NIA is the next instruction address.
                                                                  CIA is the current instruction address.
                                                                  displacement is the distance from the current instruction to the
                                                                  target_address .


                                   B.8.3 Indirect Branch Instructions (blr and bctr)
                                   The PowerPC provides two instructions that transfer control to an address
                                   held in either the LINK or COUNT register. The blr (branch to link register)
                                   instruction is typically used to return control from some subroutine. The
                                   bctr instruction is a general-purpose indirect branch that a compiler can
                                   use to implement control statements like C’s switch statement.

                                   Table B-14: Gas Syntax for blr and bctr

                                    Instruction            Description
                                    blr                    NIA := LINK
                                                           NIA is the next instruction address.
                                    bctr                   NIA := COUNT
                                                           NIA is the next instruction address.


       6    Wr it e G rea t C ode , Vo lum e 2 : T hi nk in g Low -L evel , Wr it in g Hi gh -L ev el
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 7 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             B.8.4 Conditional Branch Instructions
                             The PowerPC provides a wide range of conditional branch instructions that
                             support the same addressing modes as the unconditional branches (relative,
                             absolute, indirect through LINK, and indirect through COUNT). There are
                             also forms that will save the address of the next instruction in the LINK
                             register. The raw form of these conditional branch instructions allow you to
                             test the condition bits found in any of the eight PowerPC condition-code
                             registers (CR0..CR7). However, most assemblers (like Gas) provide “simplified
                             mnemonics” that let you test a specific condition in CR0. As these are the
                             branch instructions you’ll see used most often, we’ll discuss those forms
                             here. For details on the other forms, see the PowerPC Microprocessor
                             Family: The Programmer’s Reference Guide.
                                  The conditional branches only support a 16-bit displacement (14 bits
                             extended to 16 bits, actually). Therefore, the range of the conditional
                             branches is substantially less than the conditional branches (plus or minus
                             32,768 bytes). This generally isn’t much of a problem because conditional
                             branches typically do not transfer control over great distances in typical
                             programs.

                             Table B-15: Gas Syntax for Conditional Branches

                              Instruction   Description
                              blt target    Branch if less than.
                                            If the LT bit in CR0 is set, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                            instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                            set the NIA to CIA+4.
                              ble target    Branch if less than or equal.
                                            If the LT or EQ bit in CR0 is set, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                            instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                            set the NIA to CIA+4.
                              beq target    Branch if equal.
                                            If the EQ bit in CR0 is set, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                            instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                            set the NIA to CIA+4.
                              bgt target    Branch if greater than.
                                            If the GT bit in CR0 is set, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                            instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                            set the NIA to CIA+4.
                              bge target    Branch if greater than or equal.
                                            If the GT or EQ bit in CR0 is set, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                            instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                            set the NIA to CIA+4.
                              bnl target    Branch if not less than.
                                            Synonym for bge.
                              bne target    Branch if not equal.
                                            If the EQ bit in CR0 is clear, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                            instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                            set the NIA to CIA+4.



                                                                        O nl in e Ap pen di x B: Th e M in im al Pow erP C In s t ru ct ion Se t   7
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 8 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                   Table B-15: Gas Syntax for Conditional Branches (continued)

                                    Instruction        Description
                                    bng target         Branch if not greater than.
                                                       Synonym for ble.
                                    bso target         Branch if summary overflow.
                                                       If the SO bit in CR0 is set, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                                       instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                                       set the NIA to CIA+4.
                                    bns target         Branch if not summary overflow.
                                                       If the SO bit in CR0 is clear, then add the 16-bit displacement to the current
                                                       instruction address (CIA) to obtain the next instruction address (NIA). Otherwise,
                                                       set the NIA to CIA+4.


                                   B.8.5 Indirect Conditional Branches
                                   In addition to the relative conditional branches, the PowerPC also supports
                                   indirect versions that transfer control to the address held in the LINK or
                                   COUNT register. These instructions do not have any operands (as the
                                   LINK or COUNT register specifies the target address) and use the syntax
                                   shown here.

                                   Table B-16: Indirect Conditional Branches

                                        Indirect Branch

                                    LINK             COUNT           Description
                                    bltlr            bltctr          Branch if less than, indirect.
                                    blelr            blectr          Branch if less than or equal, indirect.
                                    beqlr            beqctr          Branch if equal, indirect.
                                    bgtlr            bgtctr          Branch if greater than, indirect.
                                    bgelr            bgectr          Branch if greater than or equal.
                                    bnllr            bnlctr          Branch if not less than. Synonym for bge.
                                    bnelr            bnectr          Branch if not equal.
                                    bnglr            bngctr          Branch if not greater than.
                                    bsolr            bsoctr          Branch if summary overflow.
                                    bnslr            bnsctr          Branch if not summary overflow.


                                   B.8.6 Other Branch Forms
                                   The PowerPC provides a bewildering array of options on the branch instruc-
                                   tions. Not many of those other forms are used in this book, so there is no
                                   need to consider them here. Please consult the PowerPC Microprocessor
                                   Family: The Programmer’s Reference Guide for more details on the available
                                   forms of the branch instructions.




       8    Wr it e G rea t C ode , Vo lum e 2 : T hi nk in g Low -L evel , Wr it in g Hi gh -L ev el
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 9 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.9 cmp
                             The cmp instruction compares the signed values in two registers and updates
                             the bits in one of the condition-code registers to reflect the comparison’s
                             results. By default, the cmp instruction assumes that you want to use CR0 to
                             hold the result, though it is possible to specify a different condition-code
                             register as the target for the comparison operation.
                                  The cmp instruction sets the LT bit in the condition-code register if the
                             first operand is less than the second operation (using a signed comparison).
                             It sets the GT bit if the first operand is greater than the second. It sets the EQ
                             bit if the two register operands hold the same value. This instruction also
                             copies the summary overflow bit from the XER register into the SO bit of the
                             condition-code register.

                             Table B-17: Gas Syntax for cmp

                              Instruction        Description
                              cmp Rs1, Rs2       CR0 := Rs1 CMP Rs2
                                                 s1 and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-18: CR0 Settings for cmp

                              Flag     Setting
                              LT       Set if the value in Rs1 (signed) is less than Rs2.
                              GT       Set if the value in Rs1 (signed) is greater than Rs2.
                              Zero     Set values in Rs1 and Rs2 are equal.
                              SO       Copied from the SO bit in the XER register.



             B.10        cmpi
                             The cmpi (compare immediate) instruction compares the signed value in a
                             register against a constant and updates the bits in one of the condition-code
                             registers. By default, the cmpi instruction assumes that you want to use CR0
                             to hold the result, though it is possible to specify a different condition-code
                             register as the target for the comparison operation.

                             Table B-19: Gas Syntax for cmpi

                              Instruction              Description
                              cmpi Rs, constant        CR0 := Rs CMP constant
                                                       s is a register number in the range 0..31.
                                                       constant is a 16-bit signed constant.




                                                                          O nl in e Ap pen di x B: Th e M in im al Pow erP C In s t ru ct ion Se t   9
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 10 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-20: CR0 Settings for cmpi

                                   Flag        Setting
                                   LT          Set if the value in Rs1 (signed) is less than constant .
                                   GT          Set Rs’s value (signed) is greater than constant .
                                   Zero        Set value in Rs1 is equal to constant .
                                   SO          Copied from the SO bit in the XER register.



             B.11            cmpl
                                  The cmpl (compare logical) instruction is similar to cmp except that it does
                                  an unsigned comparison rather than a signed comparison. The syntax and
                                  usage is the same (except, of course, that you use the cmpl mnemonic). See
                                  cmp for more details.


             B.12            cmpli
                                  The cmpli (compare logical immediate) instruction is similar to cmpi except
                                  it does an unsigned comparison. The syntax and usage is similar to cmpi
                                  except that you use the cmpli mnemonic and the 16-bit constant must be
                                  an unsigned value in the range 0..65,535. See the description of the cmpi
                                  instruction for more details.

             B.13            divw, divw., divwo, divwo.
                                  The divw (divide word, signed) instruction divides the value in one register
                                  by the value in a second register and stores the signed quotient into a third
                                  register. The version with the period suffix updates CR0 after the division
                                  operation by comparing the quotient against zero. The version with the o
                                  suffix updates the overflow flag if the division operation is illegal (e.g., a
                                  division by zero).

                                  Table B-21: Gas Syntax for divw

                                   Instruction                     Description
                                   divw Rd, Rs1, Rs2               Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                                   d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   divw. Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                                   CR0 reflects the result of the quotient.
                                                                   d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.




       10     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 11 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-21: Gas Syntax for divw (continued)

                              Instruction             Description
                              divwo Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                      The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if an error
                                                      occurs.
                                                      d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              divwo. Rd, Rs1, Rs2     Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                      CR0 reflects the result of the quotient.
                                                      The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if an error
                                                      occurs.
                                                      d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-22: CR0 Settings for divw. and divwo.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the quotient (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the quotient (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the quotient is zero.
                              SO      The summary overflow bit from the XER is copied to this field after computing the sum.


                             Table B-23: XER Settings for divwo and divwo.

                              Flag    Setting
                              OV      Set if an error (division by zero or overflow) occurred during the execution of the
                                      instruction.
                              SO      Set if the SO bit was previously set, or if a division error occurred during the execution
                                      of the instruction.
                              CA      Unaffected.



             B.14        divwu, divwu., divwuo, divwuo.
                             The divwu (divide word, unsigned) instruction divides the value in one
                             register by the value in a second register and stores the unsigned quotient in
                             a third register. The version with the period suffix updates CR0 after the
                             division operation by comparing the quotient against zero. The version with
                             the o suffix updates the overflow flag if the division operation is illegal (e.g.,
                             a division by zero).

                             Table B-24: Gas Syntax for divwu

                              Instruction                 Description
                              divwu Rd, Rs1, Rs2          Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                          d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              divwu. Rd, Rs1, Rs2         Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                          CR0 reflects the result of the quotient.
                                                          d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.




                                                                            On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   11
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 12 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-24: Gas Syntax for divwu (continued)

                                   Instruction                      Description
                                   divwuo Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                                    The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if an error
                                                                    occurs.
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   divwuo. Rd, Rs1, Rs2             Rd := Rs1 / Rs2
                                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the quotient.
                                                                    The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if an error
                                                                    occurs.
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                  Table B-25: CR0 Settings for divwu. and divwuo.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   LT         Set if the quotient is less than zero.
                                   GT         Set if the quotient is greater than zero.
                                   Zero       Set if the quotient is zero.
                                   SO         The summary overflow bit from the XER is copied to this field after computing the sum.


                                  Table B-26: XER Settings for divwuo and divwuo.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   OV         Set if an error (division by zero or overflow) occurred during the execution of the
                                              instruction.
                                   SO         Set if the SO bit was previously set, or if a division error occurred during the execution
                                              of the instruction.
                                   CA         Unaffected.



             B.15            equ, equ.
                                  The equ instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                                  and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical XNOR of the
                                  two source values and places the result in the destination register. XNOR is
                                  also known as the “equals” function, hence the mnemonic. The equ instruc-
                                  tion performs a bit-by-bit comparison of two 32-bit values. It stores a one in
                                  the corresponding destination bit position of the two source bit values are
                                  equal, it stores a zero in the destination bit position of the two source bits are
                                  not equal.




       12     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 13 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-27: Gas Syntax for equ

                              Instruction           Description
                              equ Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 == Rs2
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              equ. Rd, Rs1, Rs2     Rd := Rs1 == Rs2
                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-28: CR0 Settings for equ.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected



             B.16        extsb, extsb.
                             The extsb instruction sign extends an 8-bit value to 32 bits. This instruction
                             requires two register operands—a source register and a destination register.
                             It extracts the byte from the LO 8 bits of the first register, sign extends the
                             value to 32 bits, and then stores the result into the destination register.

                             Table B-29: Gas Syntax for extsb

                              Instruction          Description
                              extsb Rd, Rs         Rd := signExtend( Rs[0..7] )
                                                   d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              extsb. Rd, Rs        Rd := signExtend( Rs[0..7] )
                                                   d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-30: CR0 Settings for extsb.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected



             B.17        extsh, extsh.
                             The extsh instruction sign extends a 16-bit (halfword) value to 32 bits. This
                             instruction requires two register operands—a source register and a destina-
                             tion register. It extracts the halfword from the LO 16 bits of the first register,
                             sign extends the value to 32 bits, and then stores the result into the destina-
                             tion register.
                                                                         On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   13
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 14 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-31: Gas Syntax for extsh

                                   Instruction                Description
                                   extsh Rd, Rs               Rd := signExtend( Rs[0..15] )
                                                              d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   extsh. Rd, Rs              Rd := signExtend( Rs[0..15] )
                                                              d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                  Table B-32: CR0 Settings for extsh.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   LT         Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                                   GT         Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                                   Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                   SO         Unaffected



             B.18            la
                                  The la (load address) instruction is a synonym for the addi instruction. This
                                  instruction computes the effective address of a register plus displacement
                                  addressing mode and places the address in a destination register.

                                  Table B-33: Gas Syntax for la

                                   Instruction                   Description
                                   la Rd, disp(Rs)               Rd := constant + Rs
                                                                 d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                 This instruction is equivalent to:
                                                                 addi Rd, Rs, constant



             B.19            lbz, lbzu, lbzux, lbzx
                                  The lbz (load byte and zero) instruction fetches a byte from memory at an
                                  address specified by the register plus displacement addressing mode. The lbz
                                  instruction zero extends this 8-bit value to 32 bits and stores the result in the
                                  destination register.
                                       The lbzu (load byte and zero, with update) works in a similar manner
                                  except that it also updates the base address register with the effective address
                                  of the byte in memory.
                                       The lbzx (load byte and zero, indexed) also zero extends an 8-bit value
                                  in memory to 32 bits and loads this result into a destination register. This
                                  form of the instruction, however, uses both a base and index register (with
                                  no displacement).
                                       The lbzux (load byte and zero, indexed, with update) is just like lbzx
                                  except it also updates the base register with the effective address after
                                  moving the byte into the destination register.


       14     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 15 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-34: Gas Syntax for lbz

                              Instruction            Description
                              lbz Rd, disp( Rs )     Rd := zeroExtend( mem8[disp + Rs ] )
                                                     d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                     mem8[ -- ] is the byte at the memory address specified by disp + Rs.
                                                     If Rs is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                              lbzu Rd, disp( Rs )    Rd := zeroExtend( mem8[disp + Rs ] )
                                                     Rs := disp + Rs
                                                     d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                     If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.
                              lbzx Rd, Rs, Rx        Rd := zeroExtend( mem8[ Rs + Rx ] )
                                                     d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     If Rs is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.
                              lbzux Rd, Rs, Rx       Rd := zeroExtend( mem8[ Rs + Rx ] )
                                                     Rs := Rs + Rx
                                                     d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.



             B.20        lha, lhau, lhax, lhaux
                             The lha (load halfword, algebraic) instruction fetches a 16-bit word from
                             memory at an address specified by the register plus displacement addressing
                             mode. The lha instruction sign extends this 16-bit value to 32 bits and stores
                             the result in the destination register.
                                  The lhau (load halfword, algebraic, with update) works in a similar
                             manner except that it also updates the base register with the effective address
                             of the halfword in memory.
                                  The lhax (load halfword, algebraic, indexed) also sign extends a 16-bit
                             value in memory to 32 bits and loads this result into a destination register.
                             This form of the instruction, however, uses both a base and index register
                             (with no displacement).
                                  The lhaux (load halfword, algebraic, indexed, with update) is just like
                             lhax except it also updates the base register with the effective address after
                             moving the halfword into the destination register.




                                                                        On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   15
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 16 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-35: Gas Syntax for lha

                                   Instruction                     Description
                                   lha Rd, disp( Rs )              Rd := signExtend( mem16[disp + Rs ] )
                                                                   d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                                   mem16[ -- ] is the 16-bit halfword at the memory address specified by
                                                                   disp + Rs.
                                                                   If Rs is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                                   lhau Rd, disp( Rs )             Rd := signExtend( mem16[disp + Rs ] )
                                                                   Rs := disp + Rs
                                                                   d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                                   If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.
                                   lhax Rd, Rs, Rx                 Rd := signExtend( mem16[ Rs + Rx ] )
                                                                   d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   If Rs is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.
                                   lhaux Rd, Rs, Rx                Rd := signExtend( mem16[ Rs + Rx ] )
                                                                   Rs := Rs + Rx
                                                                   d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.



             B.21            lhz, lhzu, lhzx, lhzux
                                  The lhz (load halfword and zero) instruction fetches a 16-bit word from
                                  memory at an address specified by the register plus displacement addressing
                                  mode. The lhz instruction zero extends this 16-bit value to 32 bits and stores
                                  the result in the destination register.
                                       The lhzu (load halfword and zero, with update) works in a similar
                                  manner except that it also updates the base register with the effective address
                                  of the halfword in memory.
                                       The lhzx (load halfword and zero, indexed) also zero extends a 16-bit
                                  value in memory to 32 bits and loads this result into a destination register.
                                  This form of the instruction, however, uses both a base and index register
                                  (with no displacement).
                                       The lhzux (load halfword and zero, indexed, with update) is just like lhzx
                                  except it also updates the base register with the effective address after
                                  moving the halfword into the destination register.




       16     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 17 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                              Table B-36: Gas Syntax for lhz

                               Instruction             Description
                               lhz Rd, disp( Rs )      Rd := zeroExtend( mem16[disp + Rs ] )
                                                       d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                       disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                       mem16[ -- ] is the 16-bit halfword at the memory address specified by
                                                       disp + Rs.
                                                       If Rs is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                               lhzu Rd, disp( Rs )     Rd := zeroExtend( mem16[disp + Rs ] )
                                                       Rs := disp + Rs
                                                       d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                       disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                       If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.
                               lhzx Rd, Rs, Rx         Rd := zeroExtend( mem16[ Rs + Rx ] )
                                                       d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                       If Rs is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.
                               lhzux Rd, Rs, Rx        Rd := zeroExtend( mem16[ Rs + Rx ] )
                                                       Rs := Rs + Rx
                                                       d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                       If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.



             B.22        li
                              The li (load immediate) instruction is a synonym for the addi instruction
                              with R0 specified as the source register. This instruction loads a sign-
                              extended 16-bit value into the specified destination register.

                              Table B-37: Gas Syntax for li

                               Instruction           Description
                               li Rd, constant       Rd := constant
                                                     d is a register number in the range 0..31.
                                                     This instruction is equivalent to:
                                                     addi Rd, 0, constant



             B.23        lis
                              The lis instruction (load immediate, shifted) shifts a 16-bit constant to the
                              left 16 bits and then stores the value into a destination register. This instruc-
                              tion does not affect any flags or the overflow bit.

                              Table B-38: Gas Syntax for lis

                               Instruction           Description
                               lis Rd, constant      Rd := (constant << 16)
                                                     d is a register number in the range 0..31.
                                                     This instruction is a synonym for:
                                                     addis Rd, 0, constant



                                                                          On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   17
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 18 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.24            lmw
                                  The lmw (load multiple word) loads a group of registers from a contiguous
                                  block of memory. This instruction has two operands: a starting destination
                                  register and a register plus displacement effective memory address. This
                                  instruction loads all the registers from the destination register through R31
                                  starting at the specified memory location. This instruction is quite useful for
                                  saving a batch of scratch-pad registers or for quickly moving blocks of mem-
                                  ory around. Note that the base register used in the memory addressing mode
                                  must not be present in the range of registers loaded by this instruction.

                                  Table B-39: Gas Syntax for lmw

                                   Instruction                   Description
                                   lmw Rd, disp( Rs )            Rd..R31 := mem32[ disp + Rs ]...
                                                                 d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31 and s must be less
                                                                 than d.
                                                                 disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                                 mem32[ -- ]... represents n consecutive 32-bit words in memory, where
                                                                 n = 31 - d + 1



             B.25            lwz, lwzu, lwzx, lwzux
                                  The lwz (load word and zero) instruction fetches a 32-bit word from memory
                                  at an address specified by the register plus displacement addressing mode.
                                  (The z suffix exists for 64-bit members of the PowerPC family, in which case
                                  this instruction zero extends the memory value to 64 bits).
                                       The lwzu (load word and zero, with update) works in a similar manner
                                  except that it also updates the source register with the effective address of
                                  the word in memory.
                                       The lwzx (load word and zero, indexed) also loads a 32-bit value from
                                  memory into a destination register. This form of the instruction, however,
                                  uses both a base and index register (with no displacement).
                                       The lszux (load word and zero, indexed, with update) is just like lszx
                                  except it also updates the base register with the effective address after
                                  moving the 32-bit word into the destination register.




       18     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 19 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-40: Gas Syntax for lwz

                              Instruction             Description
                              lwz Rd, disp( Rs )      Rd := mem32[disp + Rs ]
                                                      d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                      disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                      mem32[ -- ] is the 32-bit word at the memory address specified by
                                                      disp + Rs.
                                                      If Rs is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                              lwzu Rd, disp( Rs )     Rd := mem32[disp + Rs]
                                                      Rs := disp + Rs
                                                      d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                      disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                      If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.
                              lszx Rd, Rs, Rx         Rd := mem32[ Rs + Rx ]
                                                      d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                      If Rs is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.
                              lwzux Rd, Rs, Rx        Rd := mem32[ Rs + Rx ]
                                                      Rs := Rs + Rx
                                                      d , s, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                      If Rs is R0, or Rs and Rd are the same, this is an invalid instruction.



             B.26        mcrf
                             The mcrf (move condition register field) instruction moves the data from one
                             condition-code register field to another condition-code register field.

                             Table B-41: Gas Syntax for mcrf

                              Instruction          Description
                              mcrf CRd, CRs        CRd := CRs
                                                   d and s are condition-code register numbers in the range 0..7.



             B.27        mcrxr
                             The mcrxr (move condition register field from XER) instruction copies bits
                             0..3 of the XER register (the SO, OV, and CA flags, along with a zero bit) into
                             the specified condition-code register. This instruction also clears bits 0..3 of
                             the XER register.

                             Table B-42: Gas Syntax for mcrxr

                              Instruction          Description
                              mcrxr CRd            CRd := XER[0..3]
                                                   d is a condition-code register number in the range 0..7.




                                                                         On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   19
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 20 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-43: CRd Settings for mcrxr

                                   Flag          Setting
                                   LT            SO field from XER
                                   GT            OV field from XER
                                   Zero          CA field from XER
                                   SO            0


                                  Table B-44: XER Settings for mcrxr

                                   Flag                  Setting
                                   SO                    0
                                   OV                    0
                                   CA                    0



             B.28            mfcr
                                  The mfcr (move from condition register) instruction copies the entire 32-bit
                                  condition-code register into a general-purpose register.

                                  Table B-45: Gas Syntax for mfcr

                                   Instruction         Description
                                   mfcr Rd             Rd := CR[0..7]
                                                       d is a general-purpose register number in the range 0..31.



             B.29            mfctr
                                  The mfctr (move from COUNT register) instruction copies the contents of
                                  the COUNT register into a general-purpose register.

                                  Table B-46: Gas Syntax for mfctr

                                   Instruction         Description
                                   mfctr Rd            Rd := COUNT
                                                       d is a general-purpose register number in the range 0..31.



             B.30            mflr
                                  The mflr (move from LINK register) instruction copies the contents of the
                                  LINK register into a general-purpose register.




       20     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 21 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-47: Gas Syntax for mflr

                              Instruction    Description
                              mflr Rd        Rd := LINK
                                             d is a general-purpose register number in the range 0..31.



             B.31        mr
                             The mr instruction (move register) requires two register operands—a
                             destination register and a source register. This instruction copies the value
                             held in the source register to the destination register. Note that this is a
                             special form of the or instruction that supplies the source register as both
                             operands for the or instruction. See the or instruction for more details.

                             Table B-48: Gas Syntax for mr

                              Instruction      Description
                              mr Rd, Rs        Rd := Rs
                                               d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.32        mtcrf
                             The mtcrf (move to condition register fields) instruction copies zero or more
                             blocks of 4 bits into one of the condition-code fields in the condition-code
                             register. This instruction has two operands: an 8-bit bitmap that specifies
                             which condition-code fields to update and a general-purpose 32-bit register.
                             For each set bit in the bitmap, this instruction copies the corresponding 4
                             bits in the general-purpose register to the corresponding positions in the
                             condition-code register. If a bit in the bitmap contains zero, then the
                             corresponding bits in the condition-code field are unaffected by this
                             instruction.

                             Table B-49: Gas Syntax for mtcrf

                              Instruction         Description
                              mtcrf bitmap, Rd    CRn := Rd[n*4..n*4+3], but only if bitmap[n] == 1
                                                  d is a general-purpose register number in the range 0..31.
                                                  bitmap is an 8-bit constant.



             B.33        mtctr
                             The mtctr (move to COUNT) instruction copies the value from a general-
                             purpose integer register to the COUNT register.




                                                                       On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   21
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 22 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-50: Gas Syntax for mtctr

                                   Instruction         Description
                                   mtctr Rd            COUNT := Rd
                                                       d is a general-purpose register number in the range 0..31.



             B.34            mtlr
                                  The mtlr (move to LINK) instruction copies the value from a general-
                                  purpose integer register to the LINK register.

                                  Table B-51: Gas Syntax for mtlr

                                   Instruction         Description
                                   mtlr Rd             LINK := Rd
                                                       d is a general-purpose register number in the range 0..31.



             B.35            mtxer
                                  The mtxer (move to XER) instruction copies the value from a general-
                                  purpose integer register to the XER register.

                                  Table B-52: Gas Syntax for mtxer

                                   Instruction         Description
                                   mtxer Rd            XER := Rd
                                                       d is a general-purpose register number in the range 0..31.



             B.36            mulhw, mulhw.
                                  The mulhw (multiply high word) instruction produces the HO 32 bits of a
                                  32×32 multiply of two registers. It stores the HO 32 bits of the product in a
                                  third register. This instruction performs a signed integer multiplication.

                                  Table B-53: Gas Syntax for mulhw

                                   Instruction                     Description
                                   mulhw Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := HO32( Rs1 × Rs2 ) (signed)
                                                                   d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   mulhw. Rd, Rs1, Rs2             Rd := HO32( Rs1 × Rs2 ) (signed)
                                                                   d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   This form updates CR0 (see Table B-54).




       22     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 23 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-54: CR0 Settings for mulhw.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the signed result is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the signed result is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the result is equal to zero.
                              SO      Copied from the SO bit in the XER register.



             B.37        mulhwu, mulhwu.
                             The mulhwu (multiply high word, unsigned) instruction produces the HO 32
                             bits of an unsigned 32×32 multiply of two registers. It stores the HO 32 bits of
                             the product in a third register.

                             Table B-55: Gas Syntax for mulhwu

                              Instruction                 Description
                              mulhwu Rd, Rs1, Rs2         Rd := HO32( Rs1 × Rs2 ) (unsigned)
                                                          d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              mulhwu. Rd, Rs1, Rs2        Rd := HO32( Rs1 × Rs2 ) (unsigned)
                                                          d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                          This form updates CR0 (see Table B-56).


                             Table B-56: CR0 Settings for mulhwu.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the signed result is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the signed result is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the result is equal to zero.
                              SO      Copied from the SO bit in the XER register.



             B.38        mulli
                             The mulli (multiply low word, immediate) instruction produces the LO 32
                             bits of a 32×32 multiply of two registers. It stores the LO 32 bits of the
                             product in a third register. Note that this instruction is suitable for both
                             signed and unsigned operands as the LO 32 bits of the product is the same
                             for both operand types.

                             Table B-57: Gas Syntax for mulli

                              Instruction                   Description
                              mulli Rd, Rs, constant        Rd := Rs × constant
                                                            d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                            constant is a 16-bit signed integer, which this instruction sign extends
                                                            to 32 bits before the multiplication occurs.


                                                                            On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   23
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 24 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.39            mullw, mullw., mullwo, mullwo.
                                  The mullw (multiply low word) instruction produces the LO 32 bits of a 32×32
                                  multiplication of two registers. It stores the LO 32 bits of the product in a
                                  third register. The LO 32 bits of a 32×32 multiplication is the same for both
                                  signed and unsigned multiplications, so you’d use this instruction to com-
                                  pute the result for either type of data.

                                  Table B-58: Gas Syntax for mullw

                                   Instruction                      Description
                                   mullw Rd, Rs1, Rs2               Rd := Rs1 × Rs2 (LO 32 bits)
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   mullwo Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 × Rs2 (LO 32 bits)
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                    This form updates XER.
                                   mullw. Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 × Rs2 (LO 32 bits)
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                    This form updates CR0.
                                   mullwo. Rd, Rs1, Rs2             Rd := Rs1 × Rs2 (LO 32 bits)
                                                                    d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                    This form updates XER and CR0.


                                  Table B-59: CR0 Settings for mullw., mullwo.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   LT          Set if the signed result is less than zero.
                                   GT          Set if the signed result is greater than zero.
                                   Zero        Set if the result is equal to zero.
                                   SO          Copied from the SO bit in the XER register.


                                  Table B-60: XER Settings for mullwo , mullwo.

                                   Flag         Setting
                                   SO           Set if SO was previously set, or the signed result does not fit into 32 bits.
                                   OV           Set if the signed result does not fit into 32 bits.
                                   CA           Unaffected.



             B.40            nand, nand.
                                  The nand instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                                  and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise)
                                  NAND (NOT AND) of the two source values and places the result in the
                                  destination register.




       24     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 25 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-61: Gas Syntax for nand

                              Instruction             Description
                              nand Rd, Rs1, Rs2       Rd := Rs1 NAND Rs2
                                                      d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              nand. Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 NAND Rs2
                                                      CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                      d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-62: CR0 Settings for nand.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected.



             B.41        neg, neg., nego, nego.
                             The neg instruction requires two register operands—a destination register
                             and a source register. This instruction computes the two’s complement of
                             the value in the source register (that is, it negates the value) and places the
                             result into the destination register.

                             Table B-63: Gas Syntax for neg

                              Instruction       Description
                              neg Rd, Rs        Rd := -Rs
                                                d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              neg. Rd, Rs       Rd := -Rs
                                                CR0 reflects the result of the negation.
                                                d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              nego Rd, Rs       Rd := -Rs
                                                The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed overflow
                                                occurs (this occurs if you attempt to negate the most negative value).
                                                d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              nego. Rd, Rs      Rd := Rs
                                                CR0 reflects the result of the sum.
                                                The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed overflow
                                                occurs.
                                                d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-64: CR0 Settings for neg. and nego.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result is greater than zero.



                                                                         On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   25
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 26 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-64: CR0 Settings for neg. and nego. (continued)

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   Zero        Set if the result is zero.
                                   SO          The summary overflow bit from the XER is copied to this field after computing the sum.


                                  Table B-65: XER Settings for nego and nego.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   OV          Set if a signed overflow occurred during the execution of the instruction. This occurs if
                                               you attempt to negate the most negative value in the two’s complement system
                                               ($8000_0000 for 32-bit values).
                                   SO          Set if the SO bit was previously set, or if a signed overflow occurred during the
                                               execution of the instruction.
                                   CA          Unaffected.



             B.42            nor, nor.
                                  The nor instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                                  and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise)
                                  NOR (NOT OR) of the two source values and places the result in the
                                  destination register. If both source operands are the same register, this
                                  instruction computes the logical NOT operation of that register.

                                  Table B-66: Gas Syntax for nor

                                   Instruction                   Description
                                   nor Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs1 NOR Rs2
                                                                 d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   nor. Rd, Rs1, Rs2             Rd := Rs1 NOR Rs2
                                                                 CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                                 d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                  Table B-67: CR0 Settings for nor.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   LT         Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                                   GT         Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                                   Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                   SO         Unaffected.




       26     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 27 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.43        or, or.
                             The or instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                             and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise) OR
                             of the two source values and places the result in the destination register. If
                             both source operands are the same register, this instruction is a synonym for
                             the mr (move register) instruction (see mr for more details).

                             Table B-68: Gas Syntax for or

                              Instruction           Description
                              or Rd, Rs1, Rs2       Rd := Rs1 OR Rs2
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              or. Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 OR Rs2
                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-69: CR0 Settings for or.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected.



             B.44        orc, orc.
                             The orc instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                             and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise) OR
                             of the first source value with the inverted value of the second source operand
                             and places the result in the destination register.

                             Table B-70: Gas Syntax for orc

                              Instruction           Description
                              orc Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 OR (NOT Rs2)
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              orc. Rd, Rs1, Rs2     Rd := Rs1 OR (NOT Rs2)
                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-71: CR0 Settings for orc.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.




                                                                         On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   27
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 28 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-71: CR0 Settings for orc. (continued)

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                   SO         Unaffected



             B.45            ori
                                  The ori (or immediate) instruction requires two register operands and a 16-
                                  bit constant. This instruction logically ORs the constant with the value held
                                  in the source register, and then places the result in the destination register.

                                  Table B-72: Gas Syntax for ori

                                   Instruction                          Description
                                   oris Rd, Rs, constant                Rd := Rs OR constant
                                                                        d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.46            oris
                                  The oris (or immediate, shifted) instruction requires two register operands
                                  and a 16-bit constant. This instruction shifts the constant to the left 16 bits,
                                  logically ORs this with the value held in the source register, and then places
                                  the result in the destination register.

                                  Table B-73: Gas Syntax for oris

                                   Instruction                          Description
                                   oris Rd, Rs, constant                Rd := Rs OR (constant << 16)
                                                                        d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.47            rlwimi, rlwimi.
                                  The rlwimi instruction (rotate left word immediate, then mask insert)
                                  requires five operands—a destination register, a source register, and three
                                  immediate operands. This instruction rotates the source operand to the left
                                  by the number of bits specified by its first immediate operand (the third
                                  operand), and then extracts bits mb..me (the second and third immediate
                                  operands) from this result and inserts those bits into the destination register
                                  (without affecting the bits outside the range mb..me in the destination
                                  register).




       28     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 29 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-74: Gas Syntax for rlwimi

                              Instruction                 Description
                              rlwimi Rd,Rs,n,mb,me        Rd := (Rd AND mask0( mb..me )) OR
                                                          ((Rd ROL n) AND mask1( mb..me))
                                                          n is a constant specifying the number of bits to rotate in the source
                                                          register.
                                                          mb and me specify the beginning and ending bit positions for the mask.
                                                          mask0( a..b) is a set of zero bits in positions a..b and ones
                                                          everywhere else.
                                                          mask1( a..b) is a set of one bits in positions a..b and zeros
                                                          everywhere else.
                                                          d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              rlwimi. Rd,Rs,n,mb,me       Rd := (Rd AND mask0( mb..me )) OR
                                                          ((Rd ROL n) AND mask1( mb..me))
                                                          CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                          n is a constant specifying the number of bits to rotate in the source
                                                          register.
                                                          mb and me specify the beginning and ending bit positions for the mask.
                                                          mask0( a..b) is a set of zero bits in positions a..b and ones
                                                          everywhere else.
                                                          mask1( a..b) is a set of one bits in positions a..b and zeros
                                                          everywhere else.
                                                          d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-75: CR0 Settings for rlwimi.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected



             B.48        rlwinm, rlwinm.
                             The rlwinm instruction (rotate left word immediate, then AND with mask)
                             requires five operands—a destination register, a source register, and three
                             immediate operands. This instruction rotates the source operand to the left
                             by the number of bits specified by its first immediate operand (the third
                             operand), and then extracts bits mb..me (the second and third immediate
                             operands) from this result stores the result into the destination register
                             (with zeros in bit positions outside the mask range).




                                                                         On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   29
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 30 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-76: Gas Syntax for rlwinm

                                   Instruction                        Description
                                   rlwinm Rd,Rs,n,mb,me               Rd := (Rd ROL n) AND mask(mb..me)
                                                                      n is a constant specifying the number of bits to rotate in the source
                                                                      register.
                                                                      mb and me specify the beginning and ending bit positions for the mask.
                                                                      mask( a..b) is a set of one bits in positions a..b and zeros everywhere
                                                                      else.
                                                                      d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   rlwinm. Rd,Rs,n,mb,me              Rd := (Rd ROL n) AND mask(mb..me)
                                                                      CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                                      n is a constant specifying the number of bits to rotate in the source
                                                                      register.
                                                                      mb and me specify the beginning and ending bit positions for the mask.
                                                                      mask( a..b) is a set of one bits in positions a..b and zeros everywhere
                                                                      else.
                                                                      d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                  Table B-77: CR0 Settings for rlwinm.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   LT         Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                                   GT         Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                                   Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                   SO         Unaffected



             B.49            rlwnm, rlwnm.
                                  The rlwnm instruction (rotate left word then AND with mask) requires five
                                  operands—a destination register, a source register, a register holding a
                                  count value, and two immediate operands. This instruction rotates the
                                  source operand to the left by the number of bits specified by count register
                                  operand (the third operand), and then extracts bits mb..me (the second and
                                  third immediate operands) from this result stores the result into the
                                  destination register (with zeros in bit positions outside the mask range).




       30     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 31 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-78: Gas Syntax for rlwnm

                              Instruction                 Description
                              rlwnm Rd,Rs,Rc,mb,me        Rd := (Rd ROL Rc) AND mask(mb..me)
                                                          mb and me specify the beginning and ending bit positions for the mask.
                                                          mask( a..b) is a set of one bits in positions a..b and zeros everywhere
                                                          else.
                                                          d, s, and c are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              rlwnm. Rd,Rs,Rc,mb,me       Rd := (Rd ROL Rc) AND mask(mb..me)
                                                          CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                          mb and me specify the beginning and ending bit positions for the mask.
                                                          mask( a..b) is a set of one bits in positions a..b and zeros everywhere
                                                          else.
                                                          d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-79: CR0 Settings for rlwnm.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected.



             B.50        slw, slw.
                             The slw instruction (shift left word) requires three register operands—a
                             destination register, a source register, a register holding a count value. This
                             instruction shifts the value of the source operand to the left by the number
                             of bits specified by the count register operand and stores the result into
                             the destination register. This is an unsigned, or logical, shift left operation.
                             Zeros are shifted into unoccupied LO bit positions. Bits shifted out of the
                             HO bit are lost.

                             Table B-80: Gas Syntax for slw

                              Instruction        Description
                              slw Rd,Rs,Rc       Rd := (Rs SHL Rc)
                                                 d, s, and c are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              slw. Rd,Rs,Rc      Rd := (Rs SHL Rc)
                                                 CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                 d, s, and c are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-81: CR0 Settings for slw.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.



                                                                         On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   31
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 32 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-81: CR0 Settings for slw. (continued)

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                   SO         Unaffected.



             B.51            sraw, sraw.
                                  The sraw instruction (shift right, arithmetic, word) requires three register
                                  operands—a destination register, a source register, a register holding a
                                  count value. This instruction shifts the value of the source operand to the
                                  right by the number of bits specified by the count register operand and
                                  stores the result into the destination register. This instruction replicates the
                                  HO (sign) bit into the HO bit position after the shift. Bits shifted out of the
                                  LO bit position are lost.

                                  Table B-82: Gas Syntax for sraw

                                   Instruction                Description
                                   sraw Rd,Rs,Rc              Rd := (Rs SHR Rc) (signed)
                                                              d, s , and c are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   sraw. Rd,Rs,Rc             Rd := (Rs SHR Rc) (signed)
                                                              CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                              d, s , and c are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                  Table B-83: CR0 Settings for sraw.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   LT         Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                                   GT         Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                                   Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                   SO         Unaffected



             B.52            srawi, srawi.
                                  The srawi instruction (shift right arithmetic word, immediate) requires two
                                  register operands (destination and source) and an immediate count value.
                                  This instruction shifts the value of the source operand to the right count bits
                                  and stores the result into the destination register. This instruction replicates
                                  the HO (sign) bit into the HO bit position after the shift. Bits shifted out
                                  of the LO bit position are lost.




       32     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 33 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-84: Gas Syntax for srawi

                              Instruction                   Description
                              srawi Rd,Rs,constant          Rd := (Rs SHR constant) (signed)
                                                            constant is the number of bits to shift, in the range 0..31.
                                                            d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              srawi. Rd,Rs,constant         Rd := (Rs SHR constant) (signed)
                                                            CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                            constant is the number of bits to shift, in the range 0..31.
                                                            d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-85: CR0 Settings for srawi.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected.



             B.53        srw, srw.
                             The srw instruction (shift right word) requires three register operands—a
                             destination register, a source register, a register holding a count value. This
                             instruction shifts the value of the source operand to the right by the number
                             of bits specified by the count register and stores the result into the destina-
                             tion register. This is an unsigned, or logical, shift right operation. It shifts
                             zeros into the unoccupied HO bit positions. Bits shifted out of the LO bit
                             position are lost.

                             Table B-86: Gas Syntax for srw

                              Instruction        Description
                              srw Rd,Rs,Rc       Rd := (Rs SHL Rc)
                                                 d, s, and c are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              srw. Rd,Rs,Rc      Rd := (Rs SHL Rc)
                                                 CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                 d, s, and c are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-87: CR0 Settings for srw.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected.




                                                                          On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   33
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 34 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.54            stb, stbu, stbux, stbx
                                  The stb (store byte) instruction stores the LO byte of a register into memory
                                  at an address specified by the register plus displacement addressing mode.
                                        The stbu (store byte with update) works in a similar manner except that
                                  it also updates the base register with the effective address of the byte in
                                  memory.
                                        The stbx (store byte, indexed) stores the byte held in the LO byte of
                                  a source register into the memory location specified by the register plus
                                  register indexed addressing mode.
                                        The stbux (store byte indexed, with update) is just like stbx except it also
                                  updates the base register with the effective address after moving the byte to
                                  memory.

                                  Table B-88: Gas Syntax for stb

                                   Instruction                      Description
                                   stb Rs, disp( Rb )               mem8[disp + Rb ] := Rd
                                                                    s and b are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                    disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                                    mem8[ -- ] is the byte at the memory address specified by disp + Rb.
                                                                    If Rb is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                                   stbu Rs, disp( Rb )              mem8[disp + Rb ] := Rd
                                                                    Rs := disp + Rs
                                                                    s and b are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                    disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                                    mem8[ -- ] is the byte at the memory address specified by disp + Rb.
                                                                    If Rb is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                                   stbx Rs, Rb, Rx                  mem8[ Rb + Rx ] := Rd
                                                                    s, b , and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                    If Rb is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.
                                   stbux Rd, Rs, Rx                 mem8[ Rb + Rx ] := Rd
                                                                    Rb := Rb + Rx
                                                                    s, b , and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                    If Rb is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.



             B.55            sth, sthu, sthux, sthx
                                  The sth (store halfword) instruction stores the LO 16 bits of a register
                                  into memory at an address specified by the register plus displacement
                                  addressing mode.
                                       The sthu (store halfword with update) works in a similar manner except
                                  that it also updates the source register with the effective address of the half-
                                  word in memory.
                                       The sthx (store halfword, indexed) stores the halfword held in the LO 16
                                  bits of the source register into the memory location specified by the register
                                  plus register indexed addressing mode.




       34     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 35 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                   The sthux (store halfword indexed, with update) is just like sthx except
                             it also updates the base register with the effective address after moving the
                             halfword to memory.

                             Table B-89: Gas Syntax for sth

                              Instruction            Description
                              sth Rs, disp( Rb )     mem16[ disp + Rb ] := Rd
                                                     s and b are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                     mem16[ -- ] is the halfword at the memory address specified by
                                                     disp + Rb.
                                                     If Rb is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                              sthu Rs, disp( Rb )    mem16[ disp + Rb ] := Rd
                                                     Rs := disp + Rs
                                                     s and b are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                     mem16[ -- ] is the halfword at the memory address specified by
                                                     disp + Rb.
                                                     If Rb is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                              sthx Rs, Rb, Rx        mem16[ Rb + Rx ] := Rd
                                                     s , b, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     mem16[ -- ] is the halfword at the memory address specified by Rb + Rx .
                                                     If Rb is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.
                              sthux Rd, Rs, Rx       mem16[ Rb + Rx ] := Rd
                                                     Rb := Rb + Rx
                                                     s , b, and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                     mem16[ -- ] is the halfword at the memory address specified by Rb + Rx .
                                                     If Rb is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.



             B.56        stmw
                             The stmw (store multiple words) writes the values in a group of registers to a
                             contiguous block of memory. This instruction has two operands: a starting
                             destination register and a register plus displacement effective memory
                             address. This instruction stores all the register values from the destination
                             register through R31 starting at the specified memory location. This instruc-
                             tion is quite useful for saving a batch of scratch-pad registers or for quickly
                             moving blocks of memory around.

                             Table B-90: Gas Syntax for stmw

                              Instruction            Description
                              stmw Rd, disp( Rs )    mem32[ disp + Rs ]... := Rd..R31
                                                     d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31 and s must be less
                                                     than d.
                                                     disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                     mem32[ -- ]... represents n consecutive 32-bit words in memory, where
                                                     n = 32 - d.




                                                                        On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   35
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 36 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.57            stw, stwu, stwux, stwx
                                  The stw (store word) instruction stores a register’s value into memory at an
                                  address specified by the register plus displacement addressing mode.
                                       The stwu (store word with update) works in a similar manner except
                                  that it also updates the base register with the effective address of the word
                                  in memory.
                                       The stwx (store word, indexed) stores the word held in the source regi-
                                  ster into the memory location specified by the register plus register indexed
                                  addressing mode.
                                       The stwux (store word indexed, with update) is just like stwx except it also
                                  updates the base register with the effective address after moving the halfword
                                  to memory.

                                  Table B-91: Gas Syntax for sth

                                   Instruction                     Description
                                   stw Rs, disp( Rb )              mem32[disp + Rb ] := Rd
                                                                   s and b are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                                   mem32[ -- ] is the word at the memory address specified by disp + Rb.
                                                                   If Rb is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                                   stwu Rs, disp( Rb )             mem32[disp + Rb ] := Rd
                                                                   Rs := disp + Rs
                                                                   s and b are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   disp is a 16-bit signed constant.
                                                                   mem32[ -- ] is the word at the memory address specified by disp + Rb.
                                                                   If Rb is R0, then this instruction substitutes the value zero for R0.
                                   stwx Rs, Rb, Rx                 mem32[ Rb + Rx ] := Rd
                                                                   s, b , and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   mem32[ -- ] is the word at the memory address specified by Rb + Rx.
                                                                   If Rb is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.
                                   stwux Rd, Rs, Rx                mem32[ Rb + Rx ] := Rd
                                                                   Rb := Rb + Rx
                                                                   s, b , and x are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                                   mem23[ -- ] is the word at the memory address specified by Rb + Rx.
                                                                   If Rb is R0, then this instruction uses zero as the value for Rs.



             B.58            sub, sub., subo, subo.
                                  The sub instruction (subtract) requires three register operands—a destination
                                  register and two source registers. This instruction computes the difference of
                                  the values in the two source registers and places the difference into the desti-
                                  nation register. This instruction is actually a synonym for the subf instruction
                                  (with the register positions swapped); see subf for details.




       36     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 37 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-92: Gas Syntax for sub

                              Instruction            Description
                              sub Rd, Rs1, Rs2       Rd := Rs1 - Rs2
                                                     d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              sub. Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 - Rs2
                                                     CR0 reflects the result of the difference.
                                                     d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              subo Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 - Rs2
                                                     The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed
                                                     overflow occurs.
                                                     d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              subo. Rd, Rs1, Rs2     Rd := Rs1 - Rs2
                                                     CR0 reflects the result of the difference.
                                                     The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed
                                                     overflow occurs.
                                                     d, s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-93: CR0 Settings for sub. and subo.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the sum (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the sum (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      The summary overflow bit from the XER is copied to this field after computing the sum.


                             Table B-94: XER Settings for subo and subo.

                              Flag   Setting
                              OV     Set if a signed overflow occurred during the execution of the instruction.
                              SO     Set if the SO bit was previously set, or if a signed overflow occurred during the
                                     execution of the instruction.
                              CA     Unaffected.



             B.59        subf, subf., subfo, subfo.
                             The subf instruction (subtract from) requires three register operands—a
                             destination register and two source registers. This instruction computes the
                             difference of the values in the two source registers and places the difference
                             into the destination register. Note that this instruction subtracts the value
                             of the first source operand from the second source operand. Assemblers
                             create the sub instruction by reversing the two source operands in the actual
                             opcode.




                                                                        On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   37
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 38 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                                  Table B-95: Gas Syntax for subf

                                   Instruction                     Description
                                   subf Rd, Rs1, Rs2               Rd := Rs2 - Rs1
                                                                   d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   subf. Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs2 - Rs1
                                                                   CR0 reflects the result of the difference.
                                                                   d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   subfo Rd, Rs1, Rs2              Rd := Rs2 - Rs1
                                                                   The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed
                                                                   overflow occurs.
                                                                   d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                   subfo. Rd, Rs1, Rs2             Rd := Rs2 - Rs1
                                                                   CR0 reflects the result of the difference.
                                                                   The overflow and summary overflow bits in XER are set if a signed
                                                                   overflow occurs.
                                                                   d , s1, and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                                  Table B-96: CR0 Settings for subf. and subfo.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   LT         Set if the sum (signed) is less than zero.
                                   GT         Set if the sum (signed) is greater than zero.
                                   Zero       Set if the sum is zero.
                                   SO         The summary overflow bit from the XER is copied to this field after computing the sum.


                                  Table B-97: XER Settings for subfo and subfo.

                                   Flag       Setting
                                   OV         Set if a signed overflow occurred during the execution of the instruction.
                                   SO         Set if the SO bit was previously set, or if a signed overflow occurred during the
                                              execution of the instruction.
                                   CA         Unaffected



             B.60            subi
                                  The subi instruction (subtract immediate) subtracts a constant from the
                                  contents of a source register and stores the difference into a destination
                                  register. The constant is limited to a signed 16-bit value (which the instruc-
                                  tion sign extends to 32 bits prior to use). This instruction does not affect
                                  any flags or the overflow bit.




       38     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 39 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




                             Table B-98: Gas Syntax for subi

                              Instruction                 Description
                              subi Rd, Rs1, constant      Rd := Rs1 - constant
                                                          d and s1 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                          This instruction is a synonym for
                                                          addi Rd, Rs, -constant.



             B.61        subis
                             The subis instruction (subtract immediate, shifted) shifts a 16-bit constant
                             to the left 16 bits, subtracts this from the value in a source register, and then
                             stores the difference into a destination register.

                             Table B-99: Gas Syntax for subis

                              Instruction                 Description
                              subis Rd, Rs, constant      Rd := Rs - (constant << 16)
                                                          d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                                                          This instruction is a synonym for
                                                          addis Rd, Rs, -constant.



             B.62        xor, xor.
                             The xor instruction requires three register operands—a destination register
                             and two source registers. This instruction computes the logical (bitwise) XOR
                             of the two source values and places the result in the destination register.

                             Table B-100: Gas Syntax for xor

                              Instruction           Description
                              xor Rd, Rs1, Rs2      Rd := Rs1 XOR Rs2
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.
                              xor. Rd, Rs1, Rs2     Rd := Rs1 XOR Rs2
                                                    CR0 reflects the result of the operation.
                                                    d, s1 , and s2 are register numbers in the range 0..31.


                             Table B-101: CR0 Settings for xor.

                              Flag    Setting
                              LT      Set if the result (signed) is less than zero.
                              GT      Set if the result (signed) is greater than zero.
                              Zero    Set if the sum is zero.
                              SO      Unaffected




                                                                         On l in e A pp en dix B : T h e M i ni ma l P ower PC I n s tr uc ti on Set   39
wgc2_OB_02.fm Page 40 Thursday, April 20, 2006 12:25 PM




             B.63            xori
                                  The xori (exclusive-or immediate) instruction requires two register operands
                                  and a 16-bit constant. This instruction logically exclusive-ORs the constant
                                  with the value held in the source register, and then places the result in the
                                  destination register.

                                  Table B-102: Gas Syntax for xori

                                   Instruction                           Description
                                   xoris Rd, Rs, constant                Rd := Rs XOR constant
                                                                         d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.



             B.64            xoris
                                  The xoris (exclusive-or immediate, shifted) instruction requires two register
                                  operands and a 16-bit constant. This instruction shifts the constant to the left
                                  16 bits, logically exclusive-ORs this with the value held in the source register,
                                  and then places the result in the destination register.

                                  Table B-103: Gas Syntax for xoris

                                   Instruction                           Description
                                   xoris Rd, Rs, constant                Rd := Rs XOR (constant << 16)
                                                                         d and s are register numbers in the range 0..31.




       40     Wri te Gre at C od e, V olu me 2: T h in kin g L ow-L ev el, Wri ti ng H ig h- Le vel
