                               2
            SH O U L DN’T YO U L E A R N
            A S S E M B LY L A N G U A G E ?




          Although this book will teach you how
          to write better code without mastering
         assembly language, the absolute best HLL
      programmers do know assembly, and that
knowledge is one of the reasons they write great code.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, although this book can
provide a 90 percent solution if you just want to write great HLL code,
to fill in that last 10 percent you’ll need to learn assembly language. While
teaching you assembly language is beyond the scope of this book, it’s still
an important subject to discuss. To that end, this chapter will explore
the following:

•   The problem with learning assembly language
•   High-level assemblers and how they can make learning assembly lan-
    guage easier
                 •   How you can use real-world products like Microsoft Macro Assembler
                     (MASM), Gas (Gnu Assembler), and HLA (High-Level Assembly) to
                     easily learn assembly language programming
                 •   How an assembly language programmer thinks (that is, the assembly
                     language programming paradigm)
                 •   Resources available to help you learn assembly language programming


     2.1 Benefits and Roadblocks to Learning Assembly Language
                 Learning assembly language—really learning assembly language—offers
                 two benefits. First, you’ll gain a complete understanding of the machine
                 code that a compiler can generate. By mastering assembly language, you’ll
                 achieve the 100 percent solution just described and be able to write better
                 HLL code. Second, you’ll be able to code critical parts of your application
                 in assembly language when your HLL compiler is incapable, even with your
                 help, of producing the best possible code. Once you’ve absorbed the les-
                 sons of the following chapters to hone your HLL skills, moving on to learn
                 assembly language is a very good idea.
                       There’s one catch to learning assembly language, though. In the past,
                 it’s been a long, difficult, and frustrating task. The assembly language pro-
                 gramming paradigm is sufficiently different from HLL programming that
                 most people feel like they’re starting over from square one when learning it.
                 It’s very frustrating when you know how to do something in a programming
                 language like C/C++, Java, Swift, Pascal, or Visual Basic, but you can’t yet
                 figure out the solution in assembly language.
                       Most programmers like being able to apply past experience when learn-
                 ing something new. Unfortunately, traditional approaches to learning assem-
                 bly language programming tend to force HLL programmers to forget what
                 they’ve learned in the past. This book, in contrast, offers a way for you to effi-
                 ciently leverage your existing knowledge while learning assembly language.


     2.2 How This Book Can Help
                 Once you’ve read through this book, there are three reasons you’ll find it
                 much easier to learn assembly language:

                 •   You’ll be more motivated to learn it because you’ll understand why
                     doing so can help you write better code.
                 •   You’ll have had five brief primers on assembly language (80x86,
                     PowerPC, ARM, Java bytecode, and Microsoft IL), so even if you’d never
                     seen it before, you’ll have learned some by the time you finish this book.
                 •   You’ll have already seen how compilers emit machine code for all the
                     common control and data structures, so you’ll have learned one of the
                     most difficult lessons for a beginning assembly programmer—how to
                     achieve things in assembly language that they already know how to do
                     in an HLL.

10   Chapter 2
             Though this book won’t teach you how to become an expert assembly
        language programmer, the large number of example programs that dem-
        onstrate how compilers translate HLLs into machine code will acquaint you
        with many assembly language programming techniques. You’ll find these
        useful should you decide to learn assembly language after reading this book.
             Certainly, you’ll find this book easier to read if you already know assem-
        bly language. However, you’ll also find assembly language easier to master
        once you’ve read this book. Since learning assembly language is probably
        more time-consuming than reading this book, the more efficient approach
        is to start with the book.


2.3 High-Level Assemblers to the Rescue
        Way back in 1995, I had a discussion with the University of California,
        Riverside, computer science department chair. I was lamenting the fact
        that students had to start over when taking the assembly course, spending
        precious time to relearn so many things. As the discussion progressed, it
        became clear that the problem wasn’t with assembly language, per se, but
        with the syntax of existing assemblers (like Microsoft Macro Assembler,
        or MASM). Learning assembly language entailed a whole lot more than
        learning a few machine instructions. First of all, you have to learn a new
        programming style. Mastering assembly language involves learning not
        only the semantics of a few machine instructions but also how to put those
        instructions together to solve real-world problems. And that’s the hard part.
             Second, pure assembly language is not something you can efficiently
        pick up a few instructions at a time. Writing even the simplest programs
        requires considerable knowledge and a repertoire of a couple dozen or
        more machine instructions. When you add that repertoire to all the other
        machine organization topics students must learn in a typical assembly
        course, it’s often several weeks before they are prepared to write anything
        other than “spoon-fed” trivial applications in assembly language.
             One important feature of MASM back in 1995 was support for HLL-like
        control statements such as .if and .while. While these statements are not
        true machine instructions, they do allow students to use familiar program-
        ming constructs early in the course, until they’ve had time to learn enough
        low-level machine instructions that they can use them in their applications.
        By using these high-level constructs early on in the term, students can con-
        centrate on other aspects of assembly language programming and not have
        to assimilate everything all at once. This allows them to start writing code
        much sooner in the course and, as a result, they wind up covering more
        material by the end of the term.
             An assembler like MASM (32-bit v6.0 and later) that provides control
        statements similar to those found in HLLs—in addition to the traditional
        low-level machine instructions that do the same thing—is called a high-level
        assembler. In theory, with an appropriate textbook that teaches assembly
        language programming using these high-level assemblers, students could
        begin writing simple programs during the very first week of the course.


                                                        Shouldn’t You Learn Assembly Language?   11
                         The only problem with high-level assemblers like MASM is that they
                    provide just a few HLL control statements and data types. Almost every-
                    thing else is foreign to someone who is familiar with HLL programming.
                    For example, data declarations in MASM are completely different from data
                    declarations in most HLLs. Beginning assembly programmers still have
                    to relearn a considerable amount of information, despite the presence of
                    HLL-like control statements.


     2.4         High-Level Assembly Language
                    Shortly after the discussion with my department chair, it occurred to me
                    that there is no reason an assembler couldn’t adopt a more high-level syntax
                    without changing the semantics of assembly language. For example, con-
                    sider the following statements in C/C++ and Pascal that declare an integer
                    array variable:

                    int intVar[8]; // C/C++

                    var intVar: array[0..7] of integer; (* Pascal *)

                        Now consider the MASM declaration for the same object:

                    intVar sdword 8 dup (?) ;MASM

                        While the C/C++ and Pascal declarations differ from each other, the
                    assembly language version is radically different from both. A C/C++ pro-
                    grammer will probably be able to figure out the Pascal declaration even if
                    they have never seen Pascal code before, and vice versa. However, Pascal
                    and C/C++ programmers probably won’t be able to make heads or tails of
                    the assembly language declaration. This is but one example of the problems
                    HLL programmers face when first learning assembly language.
                        The sad part is that there’s really no reason a variable declaration in
                    assembly language has to be so radically different from one in an HLL.
                    It makes absolutely no difference in the final executable file which syntax
                    an assembler uses for variable declarations. Given that, why shouldn’t an
                    assembler use a more high-level-like syntax so people switching over from
                    HLLs will find the assembler easier to learn? Pondering this question led
                    me to develop a new assembly language, specifically geared toward teaching
                    assembly language programming to students who had already mastered an
                    HLL, called High-Level Assembly (HLA). In HLA, the aforementioned array
                    declaration looks like this:

                    var intVar:int32[8]; // HLA

                         Though the syntax is slightly different from C/C++ and Pascal (actu-
                    ally, it’s a combination of the two), most HLL programmers can probably
                    figure out the meaning of this declaration.


12   Chapter 2
             The whole purpose of HLA’s design is to provide an assembly language
        programming environment as similar as possible to that of traditional
        (imperative) high-level programming languages, without sacrificing the
        capability to write real assembly language programs. Those components
        of the language that have nothing to do with machine instructions use a
        familiar high-level language syntax, while the machine instructions still
        map one-to-one to the underlying 80x86 machine instructions.
             Making HLA as similar as possible to various HLLs means that students
        learning assembly language programming don’t have to spend as much
        time assimilating a radically different syntax. Instead, they can apply their
        existing HLL knowledge, which makes the process of learning assembly lan-
        guage easier and faster.
             A comfortable syntax for declarations and a few HLL-like control
        statements aren’t all you need to make learning assembly language as effi-
        cient as possible, however. One very common complaint about learning
        assembly language is that it provides very little support for programmers,
        who must constantly reinvent the wheel while writing assembly code. For
        example, when learning assembly language programming using MASM,
        you’ll quickly discover that assembly language doesn’t provide useful I/O
        facilities such as the ability to print integer values as strings to the user’s
        console. Assembly programmers are responsible for writing such code
        themselves. Unfortunately, writing a decent set of I/O routines requires
        sophisticated knowledge of assembly language programming. The only
        way to gain that knowledge is by writing a fair amount of code first, but
        doing so without having any I/O routines is difficult. Therefore, a good
        assembly language educational tool also needs to provide a set of I/O rou-
        tines that allow beginning assembly programmers to do simple I/O tasks,
        like reading and writing integer values, before they have the program-
        ming sophistication to write such routines themselves. HLA accomplishes
        this with the HLA Standard Library, a collection of subroutines and macros
        that make it very easy to write complex applications.
             Because of HLA’s popularity and the fact that HLA is a free, open
        source, and public domain product available for Windows and Linux, this
        book uses HLA syntax for compiler-neutral examples involving assembly
        language. Despite the fact that it is now over 20 years old and supports only
        the 32-bit Intel instruction set, HLA is still an excellent way to learn assem-
        bly language programming. Although the latest Intel CPUs directly support
        64-bit registers and operations, learning 32-bit assembly language is just as
        relevant for HLL programmers as 64-bit assembly.


2.5 Thinking High-Level, Writing Low-Level
        The goal of HLA is to allow a beginning assembly programmer to think in
        HLL terms while writing low-level code (in other words, the exact opposite
        of what this book is trying to teach). For students first approaching assem-
        bly language, being able to think in high-level terms is a godsend—they can
        apply techniques they’ve already learned in other languages when faced


                                                       Shouldn’t You Learn Assembly Language?   13
                 with a particular assembly language programming problem. Controlling the
                 rate at which a student has to learn new concepts in this way can make the
                 educational process more efficient.
                     Ultimately, of course, the goal is to learn the low-level programming
                 paradigm. This means gradually giving up HLL-like control structures and
                 writing pure low-level code (that is, “thinking low-level and writing low-
                 level”). Nevertheless, starting out by “thinking high-level while writing low-
                 level” is a great, incremental way to learn assembly language programming.


     2.6 The Assembly Programming Paradigm
     (Thinking Low-Level)
                 It should be clear now that programming in assembly language is quite dif-
                 ferent from programming in common HLLs. Fortunately, for this book, you
                 don’t need to be able to write assembly language programs from scratch.
                 Nevertheless, if you know how assembly programs are written, you’ll be able
                 to understand why a compiler emits certain code sequences. To that end,
                 I’ll take some time here to describe how assembly language programmers
                 (and compilers) “think.”
                       The most fundamental aspect of the assembly language program-
                 ming paradigm—that is, the model for how assembly programming is
                 accomplished—is that large projects are broken up into mini-tasks that
                 the machine can handle. Fundamentally, a CPU can do only one tiny task
                 at a time; this is true even for complex instruction set computers (CISC).
                 Therefore, complex operations, like statements you’ll find in an HLL, have
                 to be broken down into smaller components that the machine can execute
                 directly. As an example, consider the following Visual Basic (VB) assign-
                 ment statement:

                 profits = sales - costOfGoods - overhead - commissions

                      No practical CPU will allow you to execute this entire VB statement as
                 a single machine instruction. Instead, you have to break this assignment
                 statement down to a sequence of machine instructions that compute indi-
                 vidual components of it. For example, many CPUs provide a subtract instruc-
                 tion that lets you subtract one value from a machine register. Because the
                 assignment statement in this example consists of three subtractions, you’ll
                 have to break the assignment operation down into at least three different
                 subtract instructions.
                      The 80x86 CPU family provides a fairly flexible subtract instruction:
                 sub(). This particular instruction allows the following forms (in HLA syntax):

                 sub( constant, reg );       // reg = reg - constant
                 sub( constant, memory );    // memory = memory - constant
                 sub( reg1, reg2 );          // reg2 = reg2 - reg1
                 sub( memory, reg );         // reg = reg - memory
                 sub( reg, memory );         // memory = memory - reg



14   Chapter 2
    Assuming that all of the identifiers in the original VB code represent
variables, we can use the 80x86 sub() and mov() instructions to implement
the same operation with the following HLA code sequence:

// Get sales value into EAX register:

mov( sales, eax );

// Compute sales-costOfGoods (EAX := EAX - costOfGoods)

sub( costOfGoods, eax );

// Compute (sales-costOfGoods) - overhead
// (note: EAX contains sales-costOfGoods)

sub( overhead, eax );

// Compute (sales-costOfGoods-overhead)-commissions
// (note: EAX contains sales-costOfGoods-overhead)

sub( commissions, eax );

// Store result (in EAX) into profits:

mov( eax, profits );

     This code breaks down the single VB statement into five different HLA
statements, each of which does a small part of the total calculation. The
secret behind the assembly language programming paradigm is knowing
how to break down complex operations like this into a simple sequence of
machine instructions. We’ll take another look at this process in Chapter 13.
     HLL control structures are another big area where complex operations
are broken down into simpler statement sequences. For example, consider
the following Pascal if() statement:

if( i = j ) then begin

    writeln( "i is equal to j" );

end;

     CPUs do not support an if() machine instruction. Instead, you com-
pare two values that set condition-code flags and then test the result of these
condition codes by using conditional jump instructions. A common way to
translate an HLL if() statement into assembly language is to test the oppo-
site condition (i <> j) and then jump over the statements that would be
executed if the original condition (i = j) evaluates to true. For example,
here’s a translation of the former Pascal if() statement into HLA (using
pure assembly language—that is, no HLL-like constructs):

    mov( i, eax );       // Get i's value into eax register
    cmp( eax, j );       // Compare eax to j's value

                                                Shouldn’t You Learn Assembly Language?   15
                     jne skipIfBody;     // Skip body of if statement if i <> j

                     << code to print string >>

                 skipIfBody:

                      As the Boolean expressions in the HLL control structures increase
                 in complexity, the number of corresponding machine instructions also
                 increases. But the process remains the same. Later, we’ll take a look at how
                 compilers translate HLL control structures into assembly language (see
                 Chapters 13 and 14).
                      Passing parameters to a procedure or function, accessing those param-
                 eters, and then accessing other data local to that procedure or function is
                 another area where assembly language is quite a bit more complex than
                 typical HLLs. This is an important subject, but it’s beyond the scope of this
                 chapter, so we’ll revisit it in Chapter 15.
                      The bottom line is that when converting an algorithm from a high-level
                 language, you have to break down the problem into much smaller pieces
                 in order to code it in assembly language. As noted earlier, the good news is
                 that you don’t have to figure out which machine instructions to use when all
                 you’re doing is reading assembly code—the compiler (or assembly program-
                 mer) that originally created the code will have already done this for you.
                 All you have to do is draw a correspondence between the HLL code and the
                 assembly code. How you accomplish that is the subject of much of the rest
                 of this book.


     2.7 For More Information
                 Bartlett, Jonathan. Programming from the Ground Up. Edited by Dominick
                   Bruno, Jr. Self-published, 2004. An older, free version of this book,
                   which teaches assembly language programming using Gas, can be
                   found online at http://www.plantation-productions.com/AssemblyLanguage​
                   /ProgrammingGroundUp-1-0-booksize.pdf.
                 Blum, Richard. Professional Assembly Language. Indianapolis: Wiley, 2005.
                 Carter, Paul. PC Assembly Language. Self-published, 2019. http://pacman128​
                   .github.io/static/pcasm-book.pdf.
                 Duntemann, Jeff. Assembly Language Step-by-Step. 3rd ed. Indianapolis:
                   Wiley, 2009.
                 Hyde, Randall. The Art of Assembly Language. 2nd ed. San Francisco:
                   No Starch Press, 2010.
                 ———. “Webster: The Place on the Internet to Learn Assembly.”
                  http://plantation-productions.com/Webster/index.html.




16   Chapter 2
