                               7
     B a y e s ’ T h e or e m w i t h L E G O




             In the previous chapter, we covered
            conditional probability and arrived at
           a very important idea in probability, Bayes’
         theorem, which states:
                                        P (B | A ) P (A )
                         P (A | B ) =
                                            P (B )

     Notice that here we’ve made a very small change from Chapter 6, writ-
ing P(B | A)P(A) instead of P(A)P(B | A); the meaning is identical, but some-
times changing the terms around can help clarify different approaches
to problems.
     With Bayes’ theorem, we can reverse conditional probabilities—so
when we know the probability P(B | A), we can work out P(A | B). Bayes’
theorem is foundational to statistics because it allows us to go from having
the probability of an observation given a belief to determining the strength
of that belief given the observation. For example, if we know the probability
                 of sneezing given that you have a cold, we can work backward to determine
                 the probability that you have a cold given that you sneezed. In this way, we
                 use evidence to update our beliefs about the world.
                      In this chapter, we’ll use LEGO to visualize Bayes’ theorem and help
                 solidify the mathematics in your mind. To do this, let’s pull out some LEGO
                 bricks and put some concrete questions to our equation. Figure 7-1 shows a
                 6 × 10 area of LEGO bricks; that’s a 60-stud area (studs are the cylindrical
                 bumps on LEGO bricks that connect them to each other).




                 Figure 7-1: A 6 × 10-stud LEGO area to help
                 us visualize the space of possible events

                     We can imagine this as the space of 60 possible, mutually exclusive
                 events. For example, the blue studs could represent 40 students who passed
                 an exam and the red studs 20 students who failed the exam in a class of 60.
                 In the 60-stud area, there are 40 blue studs, so if we put our finger on a ran-
                 dom spot, the probably of touching a blue brick is defined like this:

                                                                 40 2
                                                  P ( blue ) =     =
                                                                 60 3

                     We would represent the probability of touching a red brick as follows:

                                                                 20 1
                                                  P ( red ) =      =
                                                                 60 3




68   Chapter 7
   The probability of touching either a blue or a red brick, as you would
expect, is 1:

                               P ( blue ) + P ( red ) = 1

    This means that red and blue bricks alone can describe our entire set
of possible events.
    Now let’s put a yellow brick on top of these two bricks to represent some
other possibility—for example, the students that pulled an all-nighter study-
ing and didn’t sleep—so it looks like Figure 7-2.




Figure 7-2: Placing a 2 × 3 LEGO brick
on top of the 6 × 10-stud LEGO area

    Now if we pick a stud at random, the probability of touching the yellow
brick is:

                                                6   1
                               P ( yellow ) =     =
                                                60 10

     But if we add P(yellow) to P(red) + P(blue), we’d get a result greater
than 1, and that’s impossible!
     The issue, of course, is that our yellow studs all sit on top of the space of
red and blue studs, so the probability of getting a yellow brick is conditional
on whether we’re on a blue or red space. As we know from the previous
chapter, we can express this conditional probability as P(yellow | red), or
the probability of yellow given red. Given our example from earlier, this would
be the probability that a student pulled an all-nighter, given that they had
failed an exam.

                                                            Bayes’ Theorem with LEGO   69
     Working Out Conditional Probabilities Visually
                 Let’s go back to our LEGO bricks and work out P(yellow | red). Figure 7-3
                 gives us a bit of visual insight into the problem.




                 Figure 7-3: Visualizing P(yellow | red)

                    Let’s walk through the process for determining P(yellow | red) by
                 working with our physical representation:

                 1.   Split the red section off from the blue.
                 2.   Get the area of the entire red space; it’s a 2 × 10-stud area, so that’s
                      20 studs.
                 3.   Get the area of the yellow block on the red space, which is 4 studs.
                 4.   Divide the area of the yellow block by the area of the red block.

                      This gives us P(yellow | red) = 4/20 = 1/5.
                      Great—we have arrived at the conditional probability of yellow given
                 red! So far, so good. So what if we now reverse that conditional probability
                 and ask what is P(red | yellow)? In plain English, if we know we are on a yel-
                 low space, what is the probability that it’s red underneath? Or, in our test
                 example, what is the probability that a student failed the exam, given that
                 they pulled an all-nighter?
                      Looking at Figure 7-3, you may have intuitively figured out P(red | yellow)
                 by reasoning, “There are 6 yellow studs, 4 of which are over red, so the prob-
                 ability of choosing a yellow that’s over a red block is 4/6.” If you did follow
                 this line of thinking, then congratulations! You just independently discovered
                 Bayes’ theorem. But let’s quantify that with math to make sure it’s right.

70   Chapter 7
Working Through the Math
       Getting from our intuition to Bayes’ theorem will require a bit of work.
       Let’s begin formalizing our intuition by coming up with a way to calculate
       that there are 6 yellow studs. Our minds arrive at this conclusion through
       spatial reasoning, but we need to use a mathematical approach. To solve
       this, we just take the probability of being on a yellow stud multiplied by the
       total number of studs:

                                                                            1
               numberOfYellowStuds = P ( yellow ) × totalStuds =              × 60 = 6
                                                                           10

           The next part of our intuitive reasoning is that 4 of the yellow studs are
       over red, and this requires a bit more work to prove mathematically. First,
       we have to establish how many red studs there are; luckily, this is the same
       process as calculating yellow studs:

                                                                       1
                 numberOfRedStuds = P ( red ) × totalStuds =             × 60 = 20
                                                                       3

            We’ve also already figured out the ratio of red studs covered by yellow
       as P(yellow | red). To make this a count—rather than a probability—we mul-
       tiply it by the number of red studs that we just calculated:

                                                                                      1
        numberOfRedStuds = P ( yellow | red ) × numberOfRedStuds =                      × 20 = 4
                                                                                      5

          Finally, we get the ratio of the red studs covered by yellow to the total
       number of yellow:

                                          numberOfRedUnderYellow 4 2
                  P ( red | yellow ) =                          = =
                                            numberOfYellowStuds  6 3

            This lines up with our intuitive analysis. However, it doesn’t quite look
       like a Bayes’ theorem equation, which should have the following structure:

                                                  P (B | A ) P (A )
                                  P (A | B ) =
                                                      P (B )

           To get there we’ll have to go back and expand the terms in this equa-
       tion, like so:

                                         P ( yellow | red ) × numberOfRedStuds
                 P ( red | yellow ) =
                                                 P ( yellow ) × totalStuds

           We know that we calculate this as follows:

                                          P ( yellow | red ) P ( red ) × totalStuds
                   P ( red | yellow ) =
                                                 P ( yellow ) × totalStuds

                                                                       Bayes’ Theorem with LEGO   71
                     Finally, we just need to cancel out totalStuds from the equation, which
                 gives us:

                                                          P ( yellow | red ) P ( red )
                                   P ( red | yellow ) =
                                                                 P ( yellow )

                      From intuition, we have arrived back at Bayes’ theorem!


     Wrapping Up
                 Conceptually, Bayes’ theorem follows from intuition, but that doesn’t mean
                 that the formalization of Bayes’ theorem is obvious. The benefit of our
                 mathematical work is that it extracts reason out of intuition. We’ve con-
                 firmed that our original, intuitive beliefs are consistent, and now we have
                 a powerful new tool to deal with problems in probability that are more com-
                 plicated than LEGO bricks.
                     In the next chapter, we’ll take a look at how to use Bayes’ theorem to
                 reason about and update our beliefs using data.


     Exercises
                 Try answering the following questions to see if you have a solid understand-
                 ing of how we can use Bayes’ Theorem to reason about conditional prob-
                 abilities. The solutions can be found at https://nostarch.com/learnbayes/.

                 1.   Kansas City, despite its name, sits on the border of two US states:
                      Missouri and Kansas. The Kansas City metropolitan area consists of
                      15 counties, 9 in Missouri and 6 in Kansas. The entire state of Kansas
                      has 105 counties and Missouri has 114. Use Bayes’ theorem to calcu-
                      late the probability that a relative who just moved to a county in the
                      Kansas City metropolitan area also lives in a county in Kansas. Make
                      sure to show P(Kansas) (assuming your relative either lives in Kansas or
                      Missouri), P(Kansas City metropolitan area), and P(Kansas City metro-
                      politan area | Kansas).
                 2.   A deck of cards has 52 cards with suits that are either red or black.
                      There are four aces in a deck of cards: two red and two black. You
                      remove a red ace from the deck and shuffle the cards. Your friend
                      pulls a black card. What is the probability that it is an ace?




72   Chapter 7
