Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                                     4
        C R E AT I N G A N A M R E C E I V E R




             In this chapter, we’ll dive right into build-
             ing your first software-defined radio: an
           ­amplitude-modulated (AM) receiver. Like an
         AM car radio, it will be able to take in AM radio
 signals and convert them to listenable audio. Rather
 than work with live radio signals, however, we’ll test out
 the radio with a file containing captured radio data.
 This way you won’t have to worry about any hardware
 just yet.
     At this early stage of your SDR journey, there are two main things you
 need to learn: how to use GNU Radio Companion and the theory behind
 how SDRs are built. This chapter will focus on the former. As such, for
 now, we’ll mostly gloss over the radio theory behind the receiver we build.
 Without this theory, some of the steps you take may not make sense yet, and
 it may feel like you’re following a rote set of instructions, almost like build-
 ing a model airplane. Rest assured, though: the intention is not to give you
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark


                 simple cookbook instructions and send you on your way. We’ll keep coming
                 back to this project in the next few chapters to dig into the details of how
                 the AM receiver, and radios in general, work.
                     Open up GNU Radio Companion and let’s get started!


     Setting Up the Variables and Entries
                 Create a new flowgraph by clicking FileNew QT GUI or by pressing
                 ctrl-N. This will bring up a mostly empty starting flowgraph with just two
                 blocks already in the workspace. Every new flowgraph starts with both of
                 these blocks. The first is the Options block, which contains some basic docu-
                 mentation and settings for the flowgraph. The other is a Variable block,
                 representing the variable called samp_rate. In general, you’ll employ these
                 Variable blocks to store values used throughout the flowgraph, just like
                 defining variables in text-based programming languages like C or Python.
                 As you might guess, this particular variable has something to do with the
                 sample rate for the flowgraph.
                     Although not strictly necessary, it’s good practice to add some basic
                 information to the Options block. Double-click the block and then change
                 the Title to AM Receiver and the Description to My first AM radio receiver.
                     Next, add a QT GUI Entry block to the flowgraph, as shown in Figure 4-1.
                 (Remember, you can find new blocks using ctrl-F and the search box.)




                 Figure 4-1: Adding a QT GUI Entry

                      Like a Variable block, a QT GUI Entry stores a value for use through-
                 out the flowgraph. Unlike a Variable block, however, you can change a QT
                 GUI Entry block’s value in real time while the flowgraph is running. We
                 tend to put our Variable and QT GUI Entry blocks together at the top of the
                 flowgraph, but this isn’t necessary. The flowgraph will function the same
                 regardless of the position of the blocks in your workspace.
                      Double-click the new QT GUI Entry block to bring up its properties window.
                 Change the ID to freq and the Default Value to 880e3. This is exponential
                 notation for 880,000. It’s a common programming-language way of render-
                 ing 880 × 103. You can think of the value after the e as the number of zeros
                 that GNU Radio Companion will add to the end of the number before the e.
                 Exponential notation is especially useful for large numbers, making them
                 much easier to read. For instance, 600000000 is not as clear at first glance as
                 600e6. Remember this notation. You’ll be using it a lot.
                      There’s just one problem with what you’ve typed: if you click the Apply
                 button, you’ll see an error at the bottom telling you that the Default Value
                 is invalid, as shown in Figure 4-2.

38   Chapter 4
Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




 Figure 4-2: The QT GUI Entry error

      The problem here is related to data types. You learned that flowgraphs
 can be thought of as numbers flowing out of sources, through blocks, and
 into sinks, but you haven’t learned anything about what kind of numbers
 those are. Just as in programming languages like Python, Java, or C++,
 there are different types of data in GNU Radio Companion. As you can see
 on your screen (and in Figure 4-2), the Type property of the QT GUI Entry
 block is set to Integer, meaning it can accept positive or negative numbers
 without a decimal point, like 17 or -1293. It turns out, however, that exponen-
 tial notation produces a floating point–typed value: a number with some
 digits after the decimal point, such as 3.14159 or -8.9. To make the Type of
 the QT GUI Entry compatible with the Default Value we’ve given it, click the
 pull-down menu containing Integer and instead select Float. Then click
 Apply, and the error should go away, as shown in Figure 4-3.




                                                                  Creating an AM Receiver   39
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                 Figure 4-3: The corrected QT GUI Entry block

                      Click OK and note that the rendering of the block in the workspace
                 changes to reflect the value you’ve entered. This is useful because even as
                 our radio flowgraph gets progressively more complicated, you can see a lot
                 about how it works from a top-level view, all at a glance.
                      Next, you’ll add a second QT GUI Entry with a different ID and Default
                 Value. Instead of adding it like before, though, you can simply copy and
                 paste the first one by clicking the existing QT GUI Entry and pressing ctrl-C
                 (or selecting Edit Copy from the menu bar), followed by ctrl-V (or
                 EditPaste). Notice that the new block appears with freq_0 as its ID, as
                 shown in Figure 4-4.




                 Figure 4-4: Copying the QT GUI Entry block



40   Chapter 4
       Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark


            Double-click the new block and set its ID to center_freq with a Default
        Value of 900e3. Because you copied the block, it already has its Type set to
        Float. When you’re done, your flowgraph should look like Figure 4-5.




        Figure 4-5: The second QT GUI Entry, configured

            Notice that we’ve moved the new QT GUI Entry up to the top with the
        other blocks. Again, you may find it useful to keep all the Variable and
        QT GUI Entry blocks together at the top of the flowgraph.



Adding a Source of Radio Data
        Next, we’ll add a source block to bring radio data into the flowgraph. First,
        grab a File Source block and add it to the workspace. This will allow you to
        use a file as the radio data input to the flowgraph, so you won’t require any
        SDR hardware. The file contains actual raw radio data that an enterprising
        SDR aficionado captured from the airwaves and stored for later use. If
        you were building a fully working radio, you’d use a different source block
        instead of the File Source. This alternative source would interface with your
        SDR hardware and provide real-time radio data to your flowgraph.
              As before, double-click the newly placed block to set up its properties.
        In the File selection, click the three dots, then navigate to the location of
        the project files you downloaded earlier from https://nostarch.com/practical​
        -sdr. Select the one named ch_04/am_ broadcast_02_c900k_s400k.iq. You’ll
        see a warning in the lower portion of the properties window telling you that
        a port isn’t connected, but you’ll fix that in a moment, so don’t worry about
        it. At this point your property window should look similar to Figure 4-6.
        Click OK to return to the workspace.




                                                                         Creating an AM Receiver   41
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                 Figure 4-6: The File Source block properties

                      Now’s a good time to save the project, so press ctrl-S or select File
                 Save. We can give it any legal Linux filename, but let’s use first_am_rx.grc
                 (rx is shorthand for receiver). When working on your flowgraphs, remember
                 to save early and often.

       NOTE      From now on, we’re going to assume you know how to search for blocks and add them
                 to the design. We’ll also assume you know how to bring up the properties listing for
                 a block and change the relevant values. As such, we’ll stop spelling out each step of
                 these processes.


     Processing the Signals
                 The next several blocks we’ll add will work together to process the radio
                 signal from the File Source. Again, in this chapter we won’t focus much on
                 the details of what these blocks are doing or how exactly they work; we’ll
                 explore those questions later in the book. For now, our concern is building
                 a working flowgraph.
                     First, place a Signal Source block into your workspace. You’ll use this to
                 generate an infinitely repeating sequence of values representing a sinusoid.


42   Chapter 4
Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark


 In the block’s properties, you’re going to do something a little different: for
 the Frequency property, you aren’t going to enter a simple number. Instead,
 type center_freq - freq, as shown in Figure 4-7.




 Figure 4-7: The Signal Source properties

      Can you see what you just did here? Instead of entering a fixed number
 for a property, you can enter variables. And not just variables, but math-
 ematical expressions involving multiple variables. In fact, as you’ll see later,
 you can enter almost any legal Python expression as a property for a block
 and it will work. This will turn out to be very useful.
      In this case, you’re setting the frequency of the Signal Source using the
 two QT GUI Entry blocks you created. Specifically, you’re subtracting the value
 of the block with ID freq from the value of the block with ID center_freq.
 Notice that when you click OK and go back to your workspace view, you
 don’t see the math expression you just typed, but simply the number that
 results from it, as shown in Figure 4-8.




                                                                  Creating an AM Receiver   43
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                 Figure 4-8: Adding the Signal Source

                     In the workspace, the Signal Source frequency is listed as 20k, or 20,000.
                 This is equal to the center_freq default value of 900e3 (900,000) minus the
                 freq default value of 880e3 (880,000).
                     Next, place a Multiply block in the workspace and connect its inputs
                 to your two sources (make sure you don’t grab the wrong block, since
                 there are a lot with the word Multiply in them). Remember how to connect
                 blocks? Simply click the output port of the first block (in this case, one of
                 the sources) and then click an input port of the second (in this case, the
                 Multiply block). Clicking in reverse order also works. But which ports are
                 the Multiply inputs? If you look closely at the text inside the tabs, you’ll see
                 that two of them say in0 and in1. That’s them! In general, the inputs will
                 be on the left and the outputs on the right, but sometimes blocks will be
                 rotated and this will no longer be true. When you’re done, the flowgraph
                 should look like Figure 4-9.




44   Chapter 4
Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




 Figure 4-9: Adding and connecting the Multiply block

     As you add and connect more blocks, it’s good to take a moment here
 and there to tweak the positioning to tidy up your flowgraph. Just click and
 drag the blocks where you want them to go. As you do so, notice that the
 connections you’ve made are sticky and will follow your blocks wherever you
 drag them. This neatening process isn’t required but can make your flow-
 graph much easier to read.
     Next, add a Low Pass Filter block, setting the Cutoff Freq to 5e3 and the
 Transition Width to 1e3, as shown in Figure 4-10. Leave all the rest of the
 properties alone.




                                                                  Creating an AM Receiver   45
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                 Figure 4-10: The Low Pass Filter properties

                      Filters like this block remove or reduce certain frequencies from a sig-
                 nal. They’re an extremely important concept that we’ll explore in detail
                 in Chapter 5. Connect the Low Pass Filter input to the Multiply output. You
                 should now have a workspace similar to Figure 4-11.
                      So far, here’s what’s happening in the flowgraph: the File Source block
                 brings in data, which is then processed using the other three blocks (the
                 Signal Source, Multiply, and Low Pass Filter). As we’ll discuss in Chapter 6,
                 these three blocks comprise the AM radio’s tuner. They’re what will allow
                 you to focus in on individual radio channels within the source data.




46   Chapter 4
Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




 Figure 4-11: Adding the Low Pass Filter block

      At this stage, the Low Pass Filter block’s label should be red (not shown
 in Figure 4-11, as the book is grayscale), while the other block labels are
 black. This happens because GNU Radio Companion actively checks your
 flowgraph for errors as you build it, and any blocks with illegal conditions
 have their title displayed in red text. The illegal condition in this case is
 that the Low Pass Filter block’s output isn’t hooked up to anything. Other
 common illegal conditions include missing or invalid properties or multiple
 outputs connected to the same input.
      Now place an AM Demod block and set its Channel Rate to samp_rate and
 its Audio Decimation to 1, as shown in Figure 4-12.




                                                                  Creating an AM Receiver   47
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                 Figure 4-12: The AM Demod block properties

                      The AM Demod block will demodulate the incoming radio signal, extract-
                 ing a human-understandable audio signal from it. We’ll explore how its
                 settings work in Chapter 6. Connect its input to the Low Pass Filter output,
                 as shown in Figure 4-13.




48   Chapter 4
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




Figure 4-13: Adding the AM Demod block

                       If you’re following along on your computer, notice that the input port
                  of the AM Demod block is blue, while its output port is orange. This is sig-
                  nificant: the colors represent the type of data that flows into or out of the
                  block. Orange ports mean floating-point numbers are flowing, while blue
                  ports mean complex numbers. This is definitely not the right time to get
                  into complex numbers, so for now, just be aware that connections can only
                  be made between ports of the same color.
                       Next, place a Rational Resampler block and set its Interpolation to 32 and
                  the Decimation to 400, as shown in Figure 4-14.




                                                                                   Creating an AM Receiver   49
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                 Figure 4-14: The Rational Resampler properties

                      The Rational Resampler block will adjust the sample rate of the audio
                 signal so that your sound card can play it. Connect its input to the AM Demod
                 output, like you see in Figure 4-15.
                      But not so fast! The connection should appear on your screen as a red
                 arrow. Something is wrong, and there was a hint as to what a couple of para-
                 graphs ago.
                      You can’t connect ports of different colors. Thinking again in terms
                 of programming languages, this would be like passing a string parameter
                 to a function that’s expecting an integer. To fix the problem, open up the
                 Rational Resampler properties again and note the Type property is currently
                 Complex->Complex (Complex Taps). Instead, select Float->Float (Real Taps), then
                 click OK. You should now see that the Rational Resampler block’s ports are
                 orange, and the connection from the AM Demod to the Rational Resampler
                 should have changed from red to black.




50   Chapter 4
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




Figure 4-15: Adding the Rational Resampler block

                      We’re almost done with the flowgraph. Take a moment to think about
                  what might be missing. You have a source (two of them actually), and you
                  have some blocks that process the data coming in from that source. But
                  what are you going to do with your processed data stream? You need to
                  dump it into a sink!


    The Output
                  To output the data from the flowgraph, select an Audio Sink and add it to
                  your workspace. This block will “play” the data through your computer’s
                  sound card so that you can hear the sounds being broadcast. Double-click
                  the block and select a value of 32kHz from the pull-down menu for the
                  Sample Rate property. Then connect the output of the Rational Resampler
                  to the input of the Audio Sink. With a bit of flowgraph tweaking, you could
                  select a different sample rate, but most computer audio hardware supports
                  the 32 kHz rate.
                       There’s one last thing to do: change the sample rate for the flowgraph.
                  Did you notice how most of the blocks have a Sample Rate of 32k displayed?
                  This is because all the blocks had a default Sample Rate property equal to




                                                                                   Creating an AM Receiver   51
                  Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark


                  samp_rate. If you remember, a Variable block was present when you started
                  the project. It had an ID of samp_rate and a value of 32000. Double-click this
                  variable and change its value to 400e3, then watch what happens. You can
                  also see the result in Figure 4-16.




Figure 4-16: The completed flowgraph

                       Changing a single Variable block caused changes to ripple throughout
                  the design such that all the blocks now have a sample rate of 400k. All but
                  the last one, anyway.
                       Run the flowgraph to see if it works. As in the last chapter, just click the
                  toolbar icon that looks like a play button. If you hover over the button, it
                  will say “Execute the flowgraph.”
                       When you execute, some text will start scrolling by in the console win-
                  dow pane. Then, after a few seconds, you should hear some music. There’s
                  a bit of static, as you may have heard on other AM radios, but there are
                  clearly identifiable voices. The music will loop after a few seconds because
                  there’s not a lot of data in the File Source, and it’s set to repeat. If you don’t
                  hear any audio, try adjusting the speakers on your computer.




52   Chapter 4
Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark


      If you experience choppy audio and are running GNU Radio Companion
 in a virtual machine, open the properties window of the Audio Sink and change
 the Device Name to sysdefault, as you can see in Figure 4-17. If you aren’t work-
 ing in a VM, this isn’t advised.




 Figure 4-17: The Audio Sink setup for virtual machines

     As the flowgraph runs, a window will pop up with the two QT GUI Entry
 elements in it, as shown in Figure 4-18. This is the execution window.




                                                                  Creating an AM Receiver   53
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark




                 Figure 4-18: The flowgraph execution window

                      As mentioned early in this project, you can change these QT GUI Entry
                 values while the radio is running, whereas to change an ordinary Variable
                 block, like samp_rate, you’ll have to stop the flowgraph, change the value,
                 and run it again. In the execution window, change the value of freq to 750k,
                 then press enter. After a moment, you’ll hear a different repeating chunk
                 of audio. That’s because you’ve now tuned to a different radio station! You
                 can also find stations at 710k, 750k, and 1000k, as well as a few fainter ones at
                 950k and 1090k.
                      Take a moment to think about what you just experienced. The person
                 who created the input file you used didn’t just record the audio from an
                 AM station. That’s pretty easy to do. They recorded the raw radio signal
                 from that station, from which your flowgraph extracted recognizable audio.
                 What’s more, they didn’t just record the radio signal broadcast on a single
                 AM channel. They recorded the signals on a whole bunch of channels so
                 that you can tune to any of them whenever you want.
                      This input file (and your flowgraph) provides your first glimpse of an
                 extraordinary SDR capability: the ability to capture raw radio data and pro-
                 cess it at will.


     Conclusion
                 In this chapter, you built a simple AM radio receiver in GNU Radio
                 Companion. Without going into a lot of detail yet, let’s peel back one layer
                 of the onion on your radio design. At a very high level, here’s what your
                 AM radio receiver flowgraph is doing:

                   1. Injecting prerecorded radio data into the flowgraph
                   2. Tuning to a specific AM radio channel while filtering out other
                      AM radio channels
                   3. Demodulating the signal of your desired channel
                   4. Doing some magical thing called resampling
                   5. Playing the resulting audio on your computer speakers

54   Chapter 4
                 Practical SDR (Sample Chapter) © 01/29/25 by David Clark and Paul Clark


                  The blocks responsible for each of these five tasks are highlighted in
                  Figure 4-19.




                             1



                                       2                                                   3




                                                                                           5

                                              4



Figure 4-19: Breaking down the flowgraph by task

                      The File Source brings the data into the flowgraph 1. The Signal Source,
                  Multiply, and Low Pass Filter blocks work together to tune the signal 2,
                  which is then demodulated as it passes through the AM Demod block 3. Then
                  the signal is resampled by the Rational Resampler 4 before being output by
                  the Audio Sink 5.
                       You probably have a few questions. How does a filter work? What does
                  it even mean to resample? How on earth does multiplying a radio signal by
                  a sinusoid tune anything? You’ll get the answers these questions in the next
                  few chapters, partly so you can understand how your AM radio flowgraph
                  works, but even more so because the answers will illuminate some critical
                  radio concepts.




                                                                                   Creating an AM Receiver   55
