     3                      The Sock
                            Squid




Mysterious, charming, and delicious, squid
have fascinated and terrified humanity
ever since Pliny the Elder reported a giant
squid attack on seaside Spanish fish-brining
tanks, with several dogs and fisherman
bludgeoned in the melee (recounted in his
Naturalis Historia, circa 77 CE). Hence, the
squid is a natural subject for adorable handi-
crafts.
    The noble squid is distinguished from the
lowly octopus by having an elongated mantle
(or headsac) with two stabilizing fins; eight to
ten arms with suckers all down their length
along their inside surface; and two signifi-
cantly longer hunting tentacles that only have
suckers on their club-shaped tips.
              Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred
          Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
                     F igure 3 -1: The finished Sock Squid




                     Tools
                     >>    a sewing needle
                     >>    a tapestry needle (a standard embroidery needle will do in a pinch)
                     >>    a ruler
                     >>    scissors
                     >>    (optional) needle-nose pliers



                     Supplies
                     >>    a calf-length or knee-length sock. A tall, relatively heavy athletic sock will
                           work; you can always use the red-heeled wool socks of sock-monkey fame.
                     >>    sewing thread that matches your sock
                     >>    embroidery floss that contrasts with your sock
                     >>    a few fistfuls of stuffing (called fiberfill, and generally made from spun poly-
                           ester fibers)
                     >>    a pair of buttons



26   |   Project 3                        Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred
                                      Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
         F igure 3 -2 : Tools and supplies



         Building It
Step 1   Lay your sock out flat and measure the width of the top (the sock’s opening). You
         are going to snip all of the sock above the ankle into strips, which will ultimately
         become our squid’s arms and tentacles. As Figure 3-3 illustrates, you’ll want each of
         the arms to be roughly half the width
         of the two big tentacles. If your sock is
         around 3 1/2” wide (which isn’t unusual),              x     x       2x      x    x
         you’ll want each arm to be about 1/2”                 arm arm tentacle arm arm
         wide, and the tentacles a bit over 1” wide
         (wider tentacles will be easier to work
         with). To generalize this: In terms of
         squid appendages, the top of your sock
         is 6x inches across, where each arm is
         x inches wide, and the tentacles are 2x
         inches wide. If you do the math for this
         hypothetical sock you’ll find that the arms       F igure 3 - 3 : Your sock’s top div-
         should be 0.58” wide each. This is a ter-         vied up into squid’s arms and ten-
         rible number; round the arms down and             tacles; the sock is doubled, so this
         the tentacles up, and be happier for it.          gives eight arms and two tentacles.




                           Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred                      The Sock Squid   |   27
                       Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
           Step 2    Picture an imaginary line across the ankle of the sock, and snip each squid append-
                     age up to that point. Cut through both sides of the sock simultaneously (thus saving
                     time and keeping the squid symmetrical), then cut up the folded sides (the arms at
                     either edge in Figure 3-3), freeing the squid’s end arms, as illustrated in Figure 3-4.




                     F igure 3 - 4 : A sock with appendages separated; note the imaginary line across the
                     ankle.



           Step 3    Fold one tentacle (one of the two double-wide appendages) in half, with the
                     inside out, and trim the tip to a point (hacking off the corner at 45 degrees is good
                     enough). Starting about 1” from the tentacle’s base (i.e., the point where it joins the
                     sock), use matching thread to sew the tentacle edges together using a whipstitch
                     (shown in Figure 3-5, this is a looping overhand stitch that passes over the edge of
                     the seam, so that each stitch enters the same side of the cloth; the path of the thread
                     describes a helix). Repeat on the other tentacle.

           Step 4    Carefully turn your tentacles right side out. This is much easier if you use a pair of
                     needle-nose pliers. Starting where the tentacle meets the body, slide the tip of the
                     pliers into the inside-out tentacle, open them gently to stretch out the tentacle, clamp
                     a little bit of fabric about 1” down, and slowly pull it through. Repeat until the whole
                     tentacle is right side out. Then give the tentacle a few stretches and sew up the
                     inch of seam you left open at the base of the tentacle. Repeat on the other hunting
                     tentacle.




28   |   Project 3                       Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred
                                     Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
         F igure 3 - 5 : The whipstitched tentacle, still wrong side out (sewn with
         contrasting thread, for clarity)


Step 5   To give each tentacle its characteristic broad, spade-shaped tip, hold the tip of the
         tentacle with its seam toward you and running down the center (like the main vein
         on a leaf). Flatten the tip with your fingers, and then whipstitch around the edge
         using matching thread. To finish the tip, pinch the whipstitched edges together
         about 1” below the tip, and use a few stitches to dart the sides together, forming a
         skinny “wrist” (as in Figure 3-6).




         F igure 3 - 6 : A finished tentacle



                            Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred                        The Sock Squid   |   29
                        Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
           Step 6    Now for the eight arms. Trim 3” or 4” from each arm, rounding the tips. We’re
                     going to use the tapestry needle to finish the edges of the arms with the contrasting
                     embroidery floss. Embroidery floss is colorful, shiny yarn composed of six cotton
                     threads. For most embroidery projects you only use a few strands of floss at a time.
                     Since we want a thick line to both decorate and reinforce the arms, we’ll use all
                     six strands together. This will be easier if you use a tapestry needle instead of an
                     embroidery needle, as the former is fatter, blunter, and has a nice big eye.

           Step 7    Finish the rough edges of the
                     squid’s arms with a blanket
                     stitch.1 Pick up your sock and
                     hold it so the appendages
                     dangle down, pretty side out.
                     Start at the base of one arm,
                     with the inside (the ugly side)
                     of the sock facing away from
                     you. Thread your tapestry nee-
                     dle (as shown in Figure 3-7),
                     tie a big knot in your embroi-
                     dery floss, and then bring the
                     needle up through the fabric,
                     setting the knot on the inside
                     of the sock. To execute your
                     first blanket stitch, bring your
                     threaded tapestry needle up
                     through the fabric from the
                     ugly side again and pull all of
                     the slack through. Then thread
                     your needle back under the               F igure 3 -7: A threaded sewing needle (left)
                     stitch you just made, looping            and tapestry needle (right); note that you do
                     in from behind as shown in               not double up the embroidery floss the way
                     Figure 3-8. Take out all of the          you do sewing thread.
                     slack, and bring your next
                     stitch up from the ugly side.
                     Repeat, sewing down the arm, then flip the squid over when you get to the tip and
                     continue down toward the arm’s base. Keep going onto the next arm, until you are
                     out of floss. As you get the hang of it, you’ll find that you can work quickly by start-
                     ing the next stitch in the same motion that finishes the previous. (If the blanket stitch
                     is stressing you out, you can always just whipstitch the edges; it will hold up, but will
                     tend to curl the arms along their length, and won’t look as tidy.)

           Step 8    Add fins to the mantle (see Figure 3-9 for a close-up). Lay your sock down right
                     side out, with the toe flattened, and imagine two lines giving the toe a triangular tip.



                     1. A blanket stitch is a fancified version of a whipstitch, usually used to finish the
                     edge of a woven blanket so that it doesn’t unravel.


30   |   Project 3                        Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred
                                      Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
F igure 3 - 8 : A close-up of the blanket-stitched arm




F igure 3 - 9 : The mantle with fins, shown here sewn with contrasting thread
for clarity




                  Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred                      The Sock Squid   |   31
              Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
                     Use your sewing needle and matching thread to sew a running stitch along these
                     imaginary lines (the running stitch is explained in the PVC Teepee project).

           Step 9    Stuff the squid’s mantle. You can buy brand-new fiberfill for this at any fabric store
                     (it’s pretty cheap; three dollars’ worth will fill dozens of sock animals), pull a little
                     out of a throw pillow, use some rags, or use the other sock of the pair, which you
                     won’t be needing for anything else (unless you plan on making a Sock Cthulhu; see
                     the Sock Cthulhu section of this project). Once your squid is appropriately plump,
                     press the mantle flat at the base of the appendages, so that the hunting tentacles are
                     on the left and right. Pinch the fabric at the sock’s heel, and fold it so that the two
                     tentacles come together behind the mantle. Now use your matching thread to sew
                     a running stitch through all four layers of sock along the base of the tentacles as
                     shown in Figure 3-10.




                     F igure 3 -10 : Closing up the mantle (again, contrasting thread used for clarity); arms
                     are to the front, tentacles to the back.



           Step 10   Add eyes. You can either sew on a pair of buttons, or use more embroidery floss to
                     craft whatever eyes you deem fit. Slightly mismatched eyes are slightly creepier.




32   |   Project 3                         Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred
                                       Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
Sock Cthulhu
If you are the kind of person who wants to sew a Sock Squid, you are almost cer-
tainly the kind of person who’d want a Sock Cthulhu. To make a Sock Cthulhu,
start by make a Sock Squid, as above (which only calls for one sock), but cut the
arms significantly shorter (trim at least 5” or 6” off of each, instead of 3”), and stop
before sewing up the mantle. Set this aside—it will be the Sleepless Dreamer’s
head. For the body, sew a classic sock monkey body (Figure 3-11) from the other
sock in the pair: Turn the sock inside out, flatten it on the table with the heel up, and
make a cut going down the ankle to within roughly 2” of the heel. These are the
Sock Cthulhu’s legs.




F igure 3 -11: The body, ready to sew



      Starting about 2” from the crotch, whipstitch down each leg, closing it off.
Turn the body right side out, stuff it, and sew up the crotch. Sew the head to the
body, tack down the tentacles to make arms, add eyes, and then a pair of felt wings
(you can stiffen these with bits of coat hanger along the top, although the perky
wings of the Sock Cthulhu shown in Figure 3-12 needed no such extra support ).
Ph’nglui mglw’nafh C’thulhu R’lyeh wgah’nagl fhtagn!




                  Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred                         The Sock Squid   |   33
              Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
                     F igure 3 -12 : A finished Sock Cthulhu



                     Resources
                     For almost a decade, Poor Mojo’s Giant Squid has penned a weekly advice column:
                     http://www.squid.poormojo.org/.
                            To learn more about the Elder Gods, check your local library, or visit these
                     websites:
                     >>    http://www.mythostomes.com/
                     >>    http://www.cthulhulives.org/
                     >>    http://www.hplovecraft.com/




34   |   Project 3                       Snip, Burn, Solder, Shred
                                     Copyright 2010 by David Erik Nelson
