                 FILTERING FLOWS




            The good news is, you now have actual data
           about your network. The bad news is, you
         have far too much data about your network.
     An Internet T1 might generate millions of flow
records in a single day, while a busy Ethernet core
might generate billions or more. How can you possibly
manage or evaluate that heap of data? You must filter your data to display only
interesting flows. The flow-nfilter program lets you include or exclude flows
as needed.
     You can filter traffic in almost any way you can imagine. For example, if a
particular server is behaving oddly, you can filter on its IP address. If you’re
interested in HTTP traffic, you can filter on TCP port 80. You can reduce
your data to include only interesting traffic, which will help you evaluate and
diagnose issues. For example, if you have a large internal corporate network,
you might want to view only the traffic exchanged with a particular branch
office, filtering on all of its network addresses.




                      Network Flow Analysis
                  (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                         In Chapter 3, you viewed flow information by running flow-cat and feed-
                     ing the resulting data stream to flow-print. Filtering takes place between
                     these two processes: flow-nfilter accepts the data stream from flow-cat and
                     examines each flow. Flows that match the filter pass on to flow-print (or
                     other flow-processing programs); flows that do not match the filter drop
                     from the data stream.

     Filter Fundamentals
                     In this chapter, you’ll start by building a few simple filters. Once you under-
                     stand the basics of filter construction, you’ll examine the various filter types
                     and functions in depth.

         NOTE        Define your filters in the file filter.cfg, which is probably in /usr/local/flow-tools/
                     etc/cfg/filter.cfg or /usr/local/etc/flow-tools/filter.cfg, depending on your
                     operating system and how you installed flow-tools.

                     Common Primitives
                     You’ll build your filters out of primitives. A primitive is a simple traffic charac-
                     teristic, such as “port 80,” “TCP,” or “IP address 192.0.2.1.” For example,
                     those three primitives could be combined to create one filter that passes all
                     TCP traffic to the host 192.0.2.1 on port 80.
                          flow-nfilter supports more than a dozen different primitives and can
                     compare them with flows in more than two dozen different ways. A primitive
                     looks much like this:

                     filter-primitive name
                 X       type primitive-type
                 Y       permit value

                          The first line defines a filtering primitive and assigns the primitive a name.
                          The type at X defines the characteristic you want to match on, such as
                     an IP address, a port, or a time. (I’ll cover the most commonly useful filter
                     types.)
                          The permit statement at Y defines the values you’re looking for. By
                     default, a primitive denies everything, so you must explicitly state what your
                     filter permits. Alternatively, you could use a deny statement to create a primi-
                     tive that matches everything except what you’re looking for and explicitly put
                     a default permit statement at the end.
                          For example, a complete primitive that matches the IP address
                     192.168.1.1 looks like this:

                     filter-primitive X 192.0.2.1
                 Y       type ip-address
                 Z       permit 192.0.2.1




58   Chapter 4                               Network Flow Analysis
                                         (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
         At X I’ve named my primitive after the address it matches. You can use any
    one-word name that makes sense to you, such as “mailserver” or “firewall,” if
    you prefer. The ip-address primitive at Y matches network addresses. Finally,
    at Z this primitive matches any IP address equal to 192.0.2.1. If you include
    this primitive in a filter, it will pass traffic to or from this IP address only.
         Similarly, the following primitive defines port 25:

    filter-primitive X port25
        type Y ip-port
        permit 25

        Although I could have called this primitive 25, at X I used the name
    port25 to make it absolutely clear that this primitive matches a port because
    the number 25 by itself could be a number of seconds, a count of octets or
    packets per second, an autonomous system, a floor number, and so on. (An
    IP address is unmistakable, so using the address as a name probably won’t
    confuse you.)
        The ip-port primitive at Y is another commonly used filter component.
    Including this primitive in a filter means that the filter will pass traffic only
    on port 25.
        The default filter.cfg includes a primitive for TCP traffic, as shown here:

    filter-primitive X TCP
        type Y ip-protocol
        permit Z tcp

         You’re unlikely to mistake the name TCP at X for anything other than
    the protocol, but the ip-protocol primitive at Y lets you create a primitive
    for any TCP/IP protocol. Of course, if you have obscure network protocols,
    you’ll probably need to create additional protocol primitives, and your per-
    mit statements at Z can use either the protocol number or the protocol
    name from /etc/protocols.
         Each primitive can include only one type of match. For example, the fol-
    lowing is invalid:

  filter-primitive bogus-primitive
X     type ip-port
      permit 25
Y     type ip-address
      permit 192.0.2.1

        This primitive tries to match on both a port number (X) and an IP
    address (Y). A primitive cannot do this. To filter out connections to the
    IP address 192.0.2.1 on port 25, you must assemble a filter from multiple
    primitives.
        Now that you have a few primitives, you can create your first filter.




                          Network Flow Analysis                       Filtering Flows   59
                      (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                       Creating a Simple Filter with Conditions and Primitives
                       Combine primitives into filters with the filter-definition keyword, like so:

                   X filter-definition name
                   Y     match condition primitive1
                         match condition primitive1
                         ...

                           Every filter begins with filter-definition (X ) and a name. Filters can
                       share a name with a primitive but not with other filter definitions.
                           The filter contains a series of match keywords (Y), followed by conditions
                       and primitives. The match keyword specifies the part of the flow this entry
                       checks and the primitive to compare it to.
                           Conditions include things such as IP addresses, ports, protocols, types of
                       service, and so on. All of the conditions listed must match for the filter to
                       match a flow. For example, the following filter combines the TCP primitive
                       and the port25 primitive:

                       filter-definition TCPport25
                   X       match ip-protocol TCP
                   Y       match ip-source-port port25

                           This filter passes all flows coming from TCP port 25. Any flow that does
                       not come from TCP port 25 will not pass through the filter.
                           Although primitives and conditions look similar, their names can differ.
                       For example, both filter conditions and filter primitives use the ip-protocol
                       keyword (X). When matching ports, however, primitives use the ip-port key-
                       word (Y), but filter definitions use the ip-source-port and ip-destination-port
                       keywords instead.

          NOTE         The most common cause of filtering errors is using incorrect keywords. Use filter key-
                       words only in filters, and use primitive keywords only in primitives.


                                    N A M I N G C O N VE N T I O N S F O R F I L T E RS A N D
                                                       P RIM I T IV E S
                            Assign names to your filters and primitives carefully. If you initially choose ambigu-
                            ous or confusing names, you’ll trip over them when you have dozens or hundreds of
                            filters! Make your names easy to recognize and unmistakable in purpose.
                                 Primitives can share a name with a filter. For example, you can name a primitive
                            TCP and a filter TCP, but you cannot name two primitives TCP or two filters UDP. Also,
                            filter and primitive names are case insensitive. You cannot name one primitive tcp
                            and another primitive TCP .




60   Cha pt er 4                                 Network Flow Analysis
                                             (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
        Using Your Filter
        Use flow-nfilter’s -F option and the filter name to pass only the traffic that
        matches your filters. For example, here I’m printing only the flows that match
        the TCPport25 report:

        # flow-cat * | flow-nfilter -F TCPport25 | flow-print | less
        srcIP            dstIP            prot srcPort dstPort octets             packets
        192.0.2.37       216.82.253.163   6     25       62627    1294            12
        192.0.2.36       81.30.219.92     6     25       63946    1064            15
        203.16.60.9      192.0.2.36       6     25       1054     1628            31
        ...

            In this example, you can see only the flows where the protocol is 6 (TCP)
        and the source port is 25. This filter would be useful if you were investigating
        mail issues, for example. The filter shows that the mail server sent traffic
        from port 25, and hence the network level of the mail system is functioning.

Useful Primitives
        Now that you understand how primitives and filters work together, I’ll discuss
        primitives in depth. flow-nfilter supports many different primitives, but I’ll
        cover only the most commonly useful ones here. The flow-nfilter man page
        includes the complete primitive list, but this book contains every one that I
        have used during several years of flow analysis.

        Protocol, Port, and Control Bit Primitives
        Filtering on network protocol and port information is one of the most com-
        mon ways to strip a list of flow records down to only interesting traffic.

        IP Protocol Primitives
        You saw a basic IP protocol primitive earlier, but you can check for protocols
        other than TCP. For example, if you use IPSec, OSPF, or other network pro-
        tocols that run over IP but that are not over TCP or UDP, you’ll eventually
        need to view them separately. Filtering by protocol is the only way to differen-
        tiate between network applications that share port numbers, such as syslog
        (UDP/514) and rsh (TCP/514).
             When defining a protocol filter, you can use either the protocol number
        or name from /etc/protocols. I prefer to use the number so that /etc/protocols
        changes won’t interfere with traffic analysis. For example, OSPF runs over
        protocol 89, so here’s a filter to match it:

        filter-primitive OSPF
            type ip-protocol
            permit 89




                                Network Flow Analysis                   Filtering Flows   61
                            (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                     Similarly, IPSec uses two different protocols: ESP (protocol 50) and AH
                 (protocol 51). The following primitive matches all IPSec traffic. (Separate
                 multiple entries with commas.)

                 filter-primitive IPSec
                     type ip-protocol
                     permit 50,51

                     Although the IPSec protocols don’t have port numbers, flow-nfilter can
                 show you how much bandwidth an IPSec VPN between any two points uses
                 and where your VPN clients connect from.

         NOTE    The default filter.cfg includes primitives for TCP, UDP, and ICMP.

                 Port Number Primitives
                 Most network applications run on one or more ports. By filtering your out-
                 put to include the port only for the network service you’re interested in, you
                 ease troubleshooting. To do so, use the ip-port primitive you saw earlier.

                 filter-primitive port80
                     type ip-port
                     permit 80

                      A single primitive can include multiple ports, separated with commas
                 like so:

                 filter-primitive webPorts
                     type ip-port
                     permit 80,443

                    If you have a long list of ports, you can give each its own line and add
                 comments. This example includes services that run over TCP (telnet and
                 POP3) as well as UDP (SMB).

                 filter-primitive unwantedPorts
                     type ip-port
                     permit 23    #telnet
                     permit 110 #unencrypted POP3
                     permit 138 #Windows SMB
                 ...

                     You can also create primitives for ranges of ports.

                 filter-primitive msSqlRpc
                     type ip-port
                     permit 1024-5000

                     IP port primitives can use names from /etc/services, but I recommend
                 using numbers to insulate you from changes or errors in that file. flow-print
                 and flow-report can perform number-to-name translations if necessary.

62   Chapter 4                          Network Flow Analysis
                                    (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
TCP Control Bit Primitives
Filtering by TCP control bits identifies abnormal network flows. Use the
ip-tcp-flags primitive to filter by control bits. (See “TCP Control Bits and
Flow Records” on page 50.)

filter-primitive syn-only
    type ip-tcp-flags
    permit 0x2

     This primitive matches flows with only a SYN control bit, also known
as a SYN-only flow. Either the server never responded to the request, a fire-
wall blocked the connection request, or no server exists at the destination
address.
     These flows are fairly common on the naked Internet, where viruses and
automated port scanners constantly probe every Internet address, but they
should be comparatively uncommon on your internal network. Numerous
SYN-only flows on an internal network usually indicate misconfigured soft-
ware, a virus infection, or actual intruder probes.
     Similarly, you can filter on flows that contain only an RST. An RST-
only flow indicates that a connection request was received and immediately
rejected, generally because a host is requesting service on a TCP port that
isn’t open. For example, if you ask a host for a web page when that host
doesn’t run a web server, you’ll probably get a TCP RST.

filter-primitive rst-only
    type ip-tcp-flags
    permit 0x4

    Although a certain level of this activity is normal, identifying the peak
senders of SYN-only and RST-only flows can narrow down performance prob-
lems and unnecessary network congestion.
    To identify flows with multiple control bits set, add the control bits
together. For example, flows that contain only the SYN and RST control bits
indicate system problems. To identify these flows, write a filter that matches
SYN+RST packets.

filter-primitive syn-rst
    type ip-tcp-flags
    permit 0x6 # 0x2 (SYN) plus 0x4 (RST)

    Once you start examining TCP control bits on even a small network,
you’ll find all sorts of problems and quickly ruin your blissful ignorance.

ICMP Type and Code Primitives
Different ICMP type and code messages can illuminate network activity.
Although you can filter flows based on ICMP type and code, it’s not exactly
easy to do so.



                       Network Flow Analysis                   Filtering Flows   63
                   (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                      Flows encode the ICMP type and code as the destination port. A primi-
                 tive that matches a particular type and code uses the ip-port primitive. ICMP
                 type and code are usually expressed as hexadecimal, but ip-port takes deci-
                 mal values. (Use Table 3-4 on page 53 to identify the appropriate decimal
                 values.)
                      For example, suppose you’re looking for hosts that send ICMP redirects.
                 Redirects are ICMP type 5 and come in two codes, 0 (redirect subnet) and 1
                 (redirect host). In hexadecimal, these would be 500 and 501. Table 3-4 shows
                 their decimal values as 1280 and 1281, so write a primitive like this:

                 filter-primitive redirects
                     type ip-port
                     permit 1280-1281
                     default deny

                     Used in a filter by itself, this primitive would pass ICMP, TCP, and UDP
                 flows. When you create the actual filter, use both this primitive and the ICMP
                 primitive to see only ICMP redirects.

                 IP Address and Subnet Primitives
                 Filtering flows by addresses and subnets lets you narrow down data to hosts
                 and networks of interest.

                 IP Addresses
                 Primitives for IP addresses use the ip-address type. It’s reasonable to name
                 primitives after the IP address they match, because IP addresses are difficult
                 to confuse with other types of filter primitives.

                 filter-primitive 192.0.2.1
                     type ip-address
                     permit 192.0.2.1

                     One primitive can include any number of addresses.

                 filter-primitive MailServers
                     type ip-address
                     permit 192.0.2.10
                     permit 192.0.2.11

                     A primitive such as this MailServers example lets you match multiple hosts
                 that serve a particular function, such as “all web servers,” “all file servers,” and
                 so on.

                 Subnet Primitives
                 Primitives can also match subnets using the ip-address-mask and ip-address-
                 prefix primitives. Flow-tools provides two different formats for subnets,
                 ip-address-mask and ip-address-prefix, to match the two common notations
                 for expressing subnets.

64   Chapter 4                           Network Flow Analysis
                                     (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
   The ip-address-mask primitive expects a full IP network address with the
netmask in decimal form, as follows:

filter-primitive our-network
    type ip-address-mask
    permit 192.0.2.0 255.255.255.0

    This primitive matches all hosts with an IP between 192.0.2.0 and
192.0.2.255.
    The ip-address-prefix primitive uses prefix (slash) notation.

filter-primitive our-network
    type ip-address-prefix
    permit 192.168.0/24
    permit 192.168.1/24

    You can include multiple subnets, each on its own line, in the subnet
primitive, and the subnet masks or prefixes do not have to be equal in all the
entries. For example, the following is a perfectly valid primitive:

filter-primitive mixed-netmasks
    type ip-address-prefix
    permit 192.168.0/23
    permit 192.168.2/24

    This primitive matches any IP address between 192.168.0.0 and
192.168.2.255.

Time, Counter, and Double Primitives
You can filter flows by times during the day or by arbitrary counter values.

Comparison Operators in Primitives
Time and counter primitives use logical comparison operators, as shown in
Table 4-1.

Table 4-1: Time and Counter Comparison Operators

Operator        Comparison                   Time
gt              Greater than                 Later than
ge              Greater than or equal to     This time or later
lt              Less than                    Earlier than
le              Less than or equal to        Earlier than or equal to
eq              Equal                        Exactly this time


     Use these comparison operators only in time and counter primitives, not
in filter definitions.



                        Network Flow Analysis                           Filtering Flows   65
                    (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                 Time Primitives
                 To filter according to when flows began or stopped, use a time primitive. For
                 example, here, you’re looking for flows that stop or start some time during
                 the minute of 8:03 AM.

                 filter-primitive 0803
                     type time
                     permit eq 08:03

         NOTE    Remember, flow records use a 24-hour clock, so 8:03 PM is filtered as 20:03.
                    You can narrow down a time period even further. For example, if you
                 know that the traffic you’re interested in started and stopped during the sec-
                 ond of 8:03:30 AM, you can write a primitive for that.

                 filter-primitive 0803
                     type time
                     permit eq 08:03:30

                     You cannot filter on millisecond time intervals. Sensors and collectors
                 are rarely accurate to milliseconds, however.
                     To define a time interval, use other comparison operators. For example,
                 suppose you know that something happened on your network between
                 7:58 AM and 8:03 AM. To filter traffic during this time period, define a time
                 window from 7:58 to 8:03, inclusive, with the ge and lt operators, like so:

                 filter-primitive crashTime
                     type time
                     permit ge 07:58
                     permit le 08:03

                      Although you can control the data you report on by selecting which flow
                 files to analyze, using times helps narrow your searches even further. This is
                 invaluable when examining large files, and it demonstrates the need for
                 accurate time on your network.

         NOTE    flow-nfilter also supports the time-date primitive for a specific date and time, such as
                 January 20, 2011, at 8:03 AM. If you’re interested in a specific date, however, you’re
                 better off analyzing the flow files for that date. Flow files are named for the year, month,
                 day, and time of their creation for a reason.

                 Counter Primitives
                 The counter primitive lets you create filters like “more than 100 octets” or
                 “between 500 and 700 packets.” When creating filters of this sort, use one
                 or more comparison operators with integers to define counters, as follows:

                 filter-primitive clipping
                     type counter
                     permit gt 10000


66   Chapter 4                            Network Flow Analysis
                                      (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
           This particular filter would pass anything that has more than 10,000 of
       what you’re trying to measure. As another example, suppose you want to
       look at flows that last only 1,000 milliseconds (1 second) or longer. Here’s
       how you could do that:

       filter-primitive 1second
           type counter
           permit ge 1000

           Or, perhaps you want only flows of 1KB or larger.

       filter-primitive 1kB
           type counter
           permit ge 1024

          You can use multiple comparisons in a counter. For example, here, I’m
       permitting everything greater than 1,000 and less than 2,000:

       filter-primitive average
           type counter
           permit gt 1000
           permit lt 2000


NOTE   When using the counter primitive, keep in mind that counters work only when filtering
       based on octets, packets, and/or duration. Counters will not match TCP ports or IP
       addresses.

       Double Primitives
       No, a double primitive isn’t twice as primitive as the rest of flow-tools. A double
       primitive is a counter with a decimal point. It matches either packets per sec-
       ond or bits per second.
           For example, suppose you want to ignore all connections that send 100 or
       more packets per second. You need a primitive to define the 100 part of that.

       filter-primitive lessThan100
           type double
           permit lt 100.0

           You’ll see how to tie this to the number of packets per second in a filter
       definition, but this primitive defines the “less than 100” part of the filter.
           Like the counter primitive, the double cannot match arbitrary data. It can
       match only octets, packets, and duration.

       Interface and BGP Primitives
       Flow records exported from a router include routing information, but most
       of this information is useful only if you’re using dynamic routing such as
       Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). If you are not using BGP or other dynamic
       routing protocols, you can skip this section.


                               Network Flow Analysis                       Filtering Flows   67
                           (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                 Identifying Interface Numbers Using SNMP
                 Most router configuration interfaces (such as Cisco’s command line) give
                 each router interface a human-friendly name such as FastEthernet0 or
                 Serial1/0. Internally, the router knows each interface by a number. The
                 router uses the interface number in flow records, rather than the human-
                 friendly name.
                       The simplest way to get the list of interface names and their correspond-
                 ing numbers is through Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). If
                 you’re using multiple Internet providers, you almost certainly have some sort
                 of SNMP capability. Most Unix-like systems include the net-snmp software
                 suite, so I’ll use that as an example. Other SNMP browsers should present
                 similar results.
                       Remember, SNMP presents information as a hierarchical tree. To get a
                 list of network interfaces, check the RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr branch of the SNMP
                 tree. To see interface names and numbers, use snmpwalk to query the router’s
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr values. If your MIB browser doesn’t support human-
                 friendly names, RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr is equivalent to .1.3.6.1.2.1.2.2.1.2.

                 # snmpwalk -v X 2 -c Y community Z router RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.[1 = STRING: \ "FastEthernet0/0"
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.2 = STRING: "FastEthernet0/1"
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.4 = STRING: "Null0"
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.5 = STRING: "T1 0/0/0"
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.6 = STRING: "T1 0/0/1"
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.7 = STRING: "Serial0/0/0:0"
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.8 = STRING: "Serial0/0/1:1"
                 RFC1213-MIB::ifDescr.9 = STRING: "Tunnel1"

                      In the previous example, at X you query a router with SNMP version 2,
                 using its community name (Y) and the router’s hostname or IP address (Z).
                 In response, you get a list of router interface names.
                      The SNMP index is the router’s internal number for the interface. For
                 example, at [ interface 1 is named FastEthernet0/0 (\). Interface 7 is named
                 Serial0/0/0:0, and so on.
                      Network engineers should notice that of the eight interfaces listed,
                 interface 4 (null0) is a logical interface and should never see any traffic.
                 Similarly, interfaces 5 and 6 are not real interfaces; they are interface cards
                 supporting interfaces 7 and 8. Only five of the eight interfaces should ever
                 pass traffic.
                      By default, Cisco routers can change their interface numbering on a
                 reboot, which prevents gaps in interface numbering when interfaces are
                 added or removed. Interface numbers that change arbitrarily really confuse
                 long-term reporting, however. I recommend making your router maintain
                 consistent interface numbering across reboots. It’s true that this leaves gaps
                 in the interface list; note the absence of interface 3 on the example router.
                 On the other hand, interface 7 is always Serial 0/0/0:0, even years later. Tell
                 a Cisco device to leave interface numbering unchanged with the configura-
                 tion option snmp-server ifindex persist.


68   Chapter 4                         Network Flow Analysis
                                   (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
     Also, note that if you have multiple routers exporting data to a single col-
lector, you must separate the data to get meaningful interface information.
For example, interface 8 on router A might be a local Ethernet interface,
while interface 8 on router B might be an upstream T1 interface. You can fil-
ter data by exporter IP address, but this creates the need for an extra layer of
filtering.
     I’ll use the previous interface list in the upcoming examples. Interfaces 1
and 2 are local Ethernet ports, interfaces 7 and 8 are T1 circuits to two differ-
ent Internet service providers, and interface 9 is a VPN tunnel. The other
interfaces should never see traffic.

Interface Number Primitive
Filtering by interface passes only the traffic that traversed that interface. Use
the ifindex primitive for this purpose.

filter-primitive vpnInterface
    type ifindex
    permit 9

    Interface 9 is the VPN interface. Filtering on it shows you only traffic that
goes over the VPN.
    (You can list multiple interfaces on one line.)

filter-primitive localEthernet
    type ifindex
    permit 1,2

     Filtering by interface lets you focus on how traffic flows between particu-
lar network segments.

Autonomous System Primitives
The Autonomous System (AS) is the core of BGP routing, and routers with
BGP peers include AS number information in their flow exports. You can
pull out traffic from particular AS numbers with the as primitive as follows:

filter-primitive uunet
    type as
    permit 701

     You can list multiple AS numbers separated by commas on a single line,
or you can even list a range of AS numbers. Of course, you can also add mul-
tiple AS numbers on separate lines. (ARIN, RIPE, and other AS registrars fre-
quently issue AS numbers to large organizations in blocks, so you might need
to create such a filter.)

filter-primitive uunet
    type as
    permit 701-705



                      Network Flow Analysis                      Filtering Flows   69
                  (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                     You can also write filters for route announcement prefix length using
                 the ip-address-prefix-len primitive. I haven’t found a use for a filter that says
                 “Show me all the routes we’re getting that are /25 or longer,” but carriers
                 and transit providers might find it useful to identify clients that are trying to
                 announce tiny networks.1

     Filter Match Statements
                 To assemble primitives into filters, use match statements. flow-nfilter com-
                 pares each flow against every match statement in a filter, and if a flow fits every
                 match statement, the flow passes through. If the flow does not fit every match
                 statement, the flow is removed from the data stream.
                      Many match types have names that are similar to their associated primi-
                 tives. For example, the ip-protocol primitive has a corresponding ip-protocol
                 match. Other primitives have no single matching condition. For example,
                 the ip-port primitive can match either the ip-source-port primitive or the
                 ip-destination-port primitive. If you use an incorrect match statement in your
                 configuration, flow-nfilter exits with an error.
                      Filter definitions support many different types of match condition. The
                 flow-nfilter manual page has the complete list, but the ones I find useful are
                 described here.

                 Protocols, Ports, and Control Bits
                 Matching protocols and ports is very common. Control bits and ICMP type
                 and code are less common but powerful in a different way.

                 Network Protocol Filters
                 Use the ip-protocol match type to check each flow against an ip-protocol
                 primitive.
                     I previously defined a primitive for OSPF. Here I’m using that primitive
                 to pass only OSPF traffic:

                 filter-definition OSPF
                   match ip-protocol OSPF

                    Listing multiple protocol primitives in a filter will cause no packets to
                 match. After all, very few single flows are both TCP and UDP.

                 Source or Destination Port Filters
                 flow-nfilter has separate matches for source ports (ip-source-port) and
                 destination ports (ip-destination-port). These match against the ip-port




                 1. If you’re not a transit provider but are trying to announce tiny networks, the lesson you should
                 learn here is this: Tiny route announcements won’t work, and if they do, they can find you.

70   Chapter 4                              Network Flow Analysis
                                        (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
    primitive. Here I’m using the port80 primitive defined earlier to filter traffic
    to a web server:

    filter-definition port80
        match ip-destination-port port80

         To match multiple ports for one service, define a primitive that includes
    all the ports for that service. For example, earlier I defined a webTraffic prim-
    itive for ports 80 and 443.

    filter-definition webTraffic
        match ip-destination-port webTraffic

        Use the ip-source-port similarly. For example, to capture traffic leaving
    your web server, filter the flows leaving ports 80 and 443. (You’ll see how to
    write reports that match both arriving and departing traffic in “Logical Oper-
    ators in Filter Definitions” on page 76.)

    filter-definition webTraffic
        match ip-source-port webTraffic


    TCP Control Bit Filters
    Use the ip-tcp-flags keyword to match TCP control bit primitives. For
    example, I previously defined a rst-only primitive that matched flows that
    contained TCP resets only.

    filter-definition resets
        match ip-tcp-flags rst-only

         This filter displays only the flows that match the rst-only primitive. You
    don’t need to specify a protocol, because flow records contain control bits
    only for TCP flows. You could use very similar filters for the other TCP con-
    trol bit primitives.

    ICMP Type and Code Filters
    Remember that flows record the ICMP type and code in the destination port
    field of ICMP flows. However, unlike TCP control bits, which appear only in
    the records of TCP flows, destination ports appear in TCP, UDP, and ICMP
    flows. To specifically match ICMP type and code, your filter must include the
    destination port and the protocol as follows:

    filter-definition redirects
X       match ip-destination-port redirects
Y       match ip-protocol ICMP

        I previously defined a redirects primitive at X that matched both codes
    within the ICMP redirect type. Here, I’m adding a match (Y) for the ICMP
    protocol primitive as well. This filter passes only the flows that contain ICMP
    redirects.

                            Network Flow Analysis                    Filtering Flows   71
                        (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                 Addresses and Subnets
                 flow-nfilter supports two match types for IP addresses: source (ip-source-
                 address) or destination address (ip-destination-address). These match types
                 can work on any of the three IP address primitives: ip-address, ip-address-
                 mask, or ip-address-prefix.
                      You can match the source address on one line and the destination address
                 on another line. For example, suppose you have an ip-address-prefix primi-
                 tive for your client’s network and another for your web servers. The following
                 definition passes traffic from your client to your web server:

                 filter-definition clientsToWeb
                     match ip-destination-address webServers
                     match ip-source-address clientNetwork

                     You cannot list multiple matches of the same type in a single filter
                 because a single flow cannot have multiple source or destination addresses!
                 To pass traffic from several source or destination addresses, use a primitive
                 that contains all the desired addresses.
                     The next filter captures data coming into the server from web clients.
                 You need a corresponding report to catch traffic from your web servers to
                 the client network (or a slightly more complicated filter to capture traffic
                 moving in both directions, as you’ll see in “Logical Operators in Filter Defini-
                 tions” on page 76). Because you want to see only web traffic, you also filter
                 with primitives for web traffic and TCP.

                 filter-definition clientsToWebHttpTraffic
                     match ip-port webTraffic
                     match ip-protocol TCP
                     match ip-destination-address webServers
                     match ip-source-address clientNetwork

                      You’ll see other ways to achieve this same effect in “Using Multiple Fil-
                 ters” on page 75.

                 Filtering by Sensor or Exporter
                 Multiple flow sensors can export to a single collector, but at times you’ll
                 want to see only the flows that came from a particular sensor. You can use the
                 ip-exporter-address match with any IP address primitive to create a filter that
                 passes flows from a particular sensor, as follows:

                 filter-primitive router1
                     type ip-address
                     permit 192.0.2.1

                 filter-definition router1-exports
                     match ip-exporter-address router1

                     This particular filter passes only the flows exported from the router at
                 192.0.2.1.

72   Chapter 4                         Network Flow Analysis
                                   (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
Time Filters
The start-time and end-time match types let you filter on when flows begin
and end, using the time primitive. For example, the following sample cap-
tures all flows that take place entirely within a particular minute, using the
0803 time primitive defined earlier:

filter-definition 0803
    match start-time 0803
    match end-time 0803

     You can define a filter to match flows starting or ending at any time that
you can express with a primitive.
     In most cases, you won’t have accurate time information about prob-
lems. Human beings have a notoriously fuzzy time sense: “A few minutes ago”
might be anything from 30 seconds to an hour, and after a few days even that
is unreliable. Remember that each flow file covers a five-minute period. Most
of the time you’re better off searching entire flow files for issues rather than
trying to filter on times. I find that filtering on times is useful only on very
large flow files and then only when you have precise timing information from
the flow files themselves. A human saying that the website broke at 8:15 AM is
not reliable. If your flow records say that you had unusual traffic at 8:15 AM,
however, you might want to see what else happened during that minute. Fil-
tering on times can be useful in that instance.

Clipping Levels
A clipping level is the point at which you start ignoring data. For example, you
might not care about flows that contain tiny amounts of data, or perhaps you
want to see only tiny flows. To clip data, you can set clipping levels on the
amount of traffic transmitted, the connection speed, and the duration of
connections.

Octets, Packets, and Duration Filters
Use counter primitives to filter based on the number of octets per flow, the
packets per flow, or the duration of flows. For example, earlier I defined a
primitive for 1KB or larger. Let’s use that primitive now to remove the tiny
connections from the flow data.

filter-definition 1kBplus
    match octets 1kB

    Similarly, you created a primitive for anything that totaled 1,000 or
more, called 1second. You can write a filter that uses this primitive to allow
only flows of 1,000 milliseconds (1 second) or longer.

filter-definition over1second
    match duration 1second



                       Network Flow Analysis                     Filtering Flows   73
                   (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                     Counters are arbitrary numbers and can apply to octets, packets, or dura-
                 tion. For example, if you want a filter that includes only flows with 1,024 or
                 more packets, you could easily reuse the 1kB primitive for that.

                 filter-definition 1024plusPackets
                     match packets 1kB

                      Even though you can, I try not to reuse primitives in this way. You never
                 hear of a kilobyte of packets! Such filters confuse me. Being confused while
                 trying to identify network problems is not good.2

                 Packets or Bits per Second Filters
                 Perhaps you’re interested in how quickly connections move or you’re inter-
                 ested only in the really fast or really slow connections. If so, you can use dou-
                 ble primitives to filter based on packets per second or bits per second.
                     For example, earlier you defined a double primitive for less than 100. You
                 can use this for either packets per second or bits per second.

                 filter-definition lessThan100pps
                     match pps lessThan100

                 filter-definition lessThan100bps
                     match bps lessThan100

                     In this particular case, I don’t mind reusing the lessThan100 primitive,
                 because the name isn’t so closely tied to a particular data type.

                 BGP and Routing Filters
                 You can filter flows based on the routing information included in the flow
                 records. (If you are not using BGP, you can skip this section.)

                 Autonomous System Number Filters
                 The source-as and destination-as match types let you match based on AS
                 numbers. For example, this filter lets you see what traffic you’re receiving
                 (from what was the UUnet network) using the uunet AS primitive defined
                 earlier:

                 filter-definition uunet
                     match source-as uunet

                     You could also turn this around to create a filter to permit the traffic
                 you’re sending to UUnet systems.




                 2. I don’t need to waste my time calling myself an idiot because I gave a filter an ambiguous
                 name. Many other people are delighted to call me an idiot for all sorts of reasons.

74   Chapter 4                             Network Flow Analysis
                                       (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                Next-Hop Address Filters
                The next hop is the IP address where a router sends a flow. This is usually the
                IP address on the remote end of an ISP circuit (for outgoing flows) or the
                external address of your firewall (for inbound flows). Routers include the
                next hop in flow records. However, software flow sensors like softflowd know
                nothing of interfaces on remote hosts or how packets are routed, so flows
                exported from software flow sensors do not contain next-hop addresses.
                    Now suppose that the next-hop IP address for one of your Internet pro-
                viders is 61.118.12.45. To filter all traffic leaving your network via that ISP,
                you could use a primitive and a definition like this:

                filter-primitive ispA
                    type ip-address
                    permit 61.118.12.45

                filter-definition ispA
                    match ip-nexthop-address ispA

                    The ip-nexthop-address match type works with the primitives ip-address,
                ip-address-mask, and ip-address-prefix.

                Interface Filters
                Another way to filter by provider or network segment is to filter by the router
                interface. The match types input-interface and output-interface let you filter
                by traffic arriving or leaving your router.
                     You defined a primitive for router interface 9 earlier. Here I’m using it
                in a filter:

                filter-definition vpn
                    match input-interface vpnInterface

                    This shows traffic entering the router on this interface.

    Using Multiple Filters
                Suppose you want to identify all traffic between two machines. You could
                define primitives for those two hosts and then write a filter that specifically
                defines those hosts. However, this common situation will keep you very busy
                writing new filters. Instead, I find it much easier to define smaller filters and
                tie them together on the command line.
                     You can invoke flow-nfilter repeatedly in a single command. Find the
                flow files for the times you’re interested in, filter them for the first host, and
                then filter them a second time for the second host.

# flow-cat ft-* | X flow-nfilter -F host1 | Y flow-nfilter -F host2 | flow-print | less




                                        Network Flow Analysis                     Filtering Flows   75
                                    (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                        The first flow-nfilter invocation at X passes only flows that include traf-
                   fic from host1. The second at Y passes only flows that include traffic from
                   host2.
                        Similarly, you can write separate filters for certain protocols, like all web
                   traffic. You previously created a filter for all HTTP and HTTPS traffic, called
                   webTraffic.

# flow-cat ft-* | X flow-nfilter -F host1 | Y flow-nfilter -F webTraffic | flow-print | less

                       The first filter at X passes only traffic for the interesting host, and the
                   second (Y) passes only HTTP and HTTPS traffic.
                       You can create simple filters for important hosts and subnets on your
                   network. For example, if you have a customer who reports problems reach-
                   ing your website, you could write one flow filter for your site and one for the
                   customer’s addresses and use them both to see what traffic passed between
                   your networks. You could then look for SYN-only or RST-only flows that
                   would indicate problems. Or you might find that traffic from the customer’s
                   network never reaches you at all. In any case, these two filters will tell you
                   exactly what traffic appeared on your network and how it behaved.
                       By combining filters on the command line, you will write fewer filters
                   and get more use out of the filters you create.

     Logical Operators in Filter Definitions
                   When you put multiple match conditions in a filter definition, flow-nfilter
                   places a logical “and” between them. For example, the following filter shows
                   all traffic that runs over TCP and has a source port of 25. This passes an
                   email server’s responses to a connection.

                   filter-definition TCPport25
                       match ip-protocol TCP
                       match ip-source-port port25

                       You can use other logical operators to build very complicated filters.

                   Logical “or”
                   When I try to analyze a connection problem, I usually want to see both sides
                   of the conversation. I want a filter that will show connections to port 25 as
                   well as from port 25. For this, use the or operator as follows:

                   filter-definition email
                       match ip-protocol TCP
                       match ip-source-port port25
                 X     or
                 Y     match ip-protocol TCP
                 Z     match ip-destination-port port25




76   Chapter 4                            Network Flow Analysis
                                      (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
          After the or statement at X, a whole new filter definition begins. Although
    I listed TCP in the first filter, if you’re interested in TCP in the second filter,
    you must repeat the match on TCP at Y, after which you can add the new
    match statement at Z to catch flows that end on port 25. Now, if you apply this
    filter to your flow data, you’ll see something like this:

  # flow-cat ft-v05.2011-12-20.12* | flow-nfilter -F email | flow-print | less
  srcIP            dstIP            prot srcPort dstPort octets         packets
X 217.199.0.33     192.0.2.37       6     5673     25       192726      298
Y 192.0.2.37       217.199.0.33     6     25       5673     8558        181
  206.165.246.249 192.0.2.37        6     38904    25       13283       22
  192.0.2.37       206.165.246.249 6      25       38904    1484        16
  ...

          The first flow at X is from a remote IP to the address of the local email
    server, with a destination port of 25. This is an incoming mail transmission.
    The second flow at Y is from the mail server to the same remote IP address;
    it’s coming from port 25. This is the response to the first flow.
          I could use more sophisticated flow-print formats to view this in more
    detail, run flow-report on this data to check for errors, or add another filter
    to specifically point out TCP errors in the email stream. This simple check
    shows me that the mail server is exchanging substantial amounts of traffic
    on TCP port 25, however. I would tell my mail administrator to check the
    logs for errors or provide more information.

    Filter Inversion
    Sometimes it’s easier to write a filter for the traffic you’re not interested in.
    For example, suppose you want to see all the traffic to or from your email
    servers that isn’t email. Although you could write primitives that included all
    port numbers except those for email, that’s annoying and tedious.
        Instead, use the invert keyword to reverse the meaning of a filter, like so:

    filter-definition not-email
X       invert
        match ip-protocol TCP
        match ip-source-port port25
        or
        match ip-protocol TCP
        match ip-destination-port port25

         By adding invert to the report at X, you pass everything that doesn’t
    match the defined filters. In this example, I’m passing every network transac-
    tion that doesn’t involve TCP port 25.
         But there’s a problem with this filter: It will match all nonemail traffic on
    all the hosts for which you’re capturing data. You, however, need to view only
    traffic for your email hosts.




                           Network Flow Analysis                       Filtering Flows   77
                       (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                          To solve this problem, you could add your email servers into the not-email
                     filter, but the email servers both send and receive email. You would need a
                     definition section for remote servers connecting to your mail servers, a sec-
                     tion for your servers’ response to those remote servers, a third section for
                     your mail servers connecting to remote mail servers, and a fourth for the
                     remote servers’ responses to your servers’ requests. That’s pretty ugly.
                          It’s much simpler to define a separate filter that strips the flow data down
                     to just the email servers and then to concatenate the two, as follows:

                 X       filter-primitive emailServers
                         type ip-address
                         permit 192.0.2.37
                         permit 192.0.2.36

                 Y       filter-definition emailServers
                         match ip-source-address emailServers
                         or
                         match ip-destination-address emailServers

                         The emailServers primitive at X includes the IP addresses of all the mail
                     servers. Next, at Y I create a filter definition to match all traffic leaving or
                     going to those servers. Then, to see all nonemail traffic to or from my email
                     servers, I do this:

# flow-cat * | X flow-nfilter -F emailServers | Y flow-nfilter -F not-email | flow-print | less

                          The emailServers filter at X passes only the flows that involve my email
                     servers. The not-email filter at Y passes only flows that are not SMTP. By com-
                     bining these two filters, I see only interesting traffic. I’ll probably need to
                     adjust the filter further to remove other uninteresting traffic, such as DNS
                     queries to the DNS server, but I’m almost there.
                          Of course, after reviewing the filtered traffic, I can go ask my email
                     administrator why he’s running his own DNS server on the mail server
                     instead of using the corporate name servers and why he browses the Web
                     from those machines instead of using the proxy server and its adult content
                     filters.3

     Filters and Variables
                     Flow-tools also includes filters that can be configured on the command line,
                     which can be useful for very simple filters, such as identifying traffic from a par-
                     ticular IP address. The default filters that use these are fairly limited, but they’ll
                     suffice for simple traffic analysis. It’s also easy to write your own variable-driven
                     reports.




                     3. Yes, I could take this straight to human resources, but HR won’t wash and wax my car.

78   Chapter 4                                 Network Flow Analysis
                                           (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
Using Variable-Driven Filters
The filters that are configurable on the command line use three variables:
ADDR (address), PORT (port), and PROT (protocol). These support five reports,
letting you filter by protocol as well as by source and destination address and
port: ip-src-addr, ip-dst-addr, ip-src-port, ip-dest-port, and ip-prot.
     Suppose your boss calls. She’s connecting from a random open wireless
hotspot in some inconvenient city and can’t get into the corporate VPN con-
centrator. You get her IP address, either by asking her for it or by accessing
system logs to see where she’s coming from. To see all the traffic coming to
your network from her IP, without writing a custom filter, you could use a
command-line variable on the flow files for that time window. For example, if
she’s at the IP address 192.0.2.8, you’d use a command like this:

# flow-cat * | flow-nfilter -F ip-src-addr X -v ADDR=192.0.2.8 | flow-print

    The -v argument at X tells flow-nfilter that you’re assigning a value to a
variable. In this example, I’ve assigned the value 192.0.2.8 to the variable
ADDR. You’ll see all traffic originating from that IP address.



           W H E N T O U S E VA RIA B L E- D R I VE N F I L T E RS ?

    For simple filters on individual hosts and ports, use variable-driven filters. If you must
    filter on multiple hosts or ranges of ports, define primitives and filters in filter.cfg.




Defining Your Own Variable-Driven Filters
Variable-driven filters take advantage of the primitives VAR_ADDR (address),
VAR_PORT (port), and VAR_PROT (protocol), as defined in filter.cfg. For example,
the following is a default variable-driven filter that uses the ADDR variable. This
looks exactly like a standard report, except that it uses the variable name
instead of a primitive.

filter-definition ip-src-addr
    match ip-source-address VAR_ADDR

     Use these variables to define your own variable-driven filters. For example,
I like to see all traffic to and from a host of interest. Writing a command-line
version of this report is easy.

filter-definition ip-addr
    match ip-destination-address VAR_ADDR
    or
    match ip-source-address VAR_ADDR

    Similarly, I prefer to see all traffic to and from a port simultaneously.



                          Network Flow Analysis                                   F il te rin g F low s   79
                      (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
                     filter-definition ip-port
                         match ip-destination-address VAR_PORT
                         or
                         match ip-source-address VAR_PORT

                         With these reports, I can dynamically filter for any individual host or port
                     on the fly.

                     Creating Your Own Variables
                     VAR_ADDR, VAR_PORT, and VAR_PROT are not magic variables hard-coded into
                     flow-nfilter; they’re defined in filter.cfg. Here’s the definition of VAR_PORT:

                     filter-primitive VAR_PORT
                         type ip-port
                         permit X @{PORT:-0}

                         Most of this primitive looks like any other primitive for a port number,
                     but the permit statement (X) is very different. This example takes the vari-
                     able PORT as defined on the command line and turns it into a number. The
                     specifics of how this works aren’t important, but you can use this sample as a
                     model for your own primitives.
                         Now here’s another example. I frequently work with BGP, so I need an
                     AS number primitive.

                 X filter-primitive VAR_AS
                 Y type as
                 Z permit @{AS:-0}

                         I’ve assigned this primitive the name VAR_AS at X to correspond with the
                     existing variable names, and I’ve assigned it the as type (Y). The permit state-
                     ment at Z is copied from the VAR_PORT primitive, substituting the variable
                     name AS for the port. Now I can create a filter using this variable.

                   filter-definition AS
                 X     match source-as VAR_AS
                       or
                 Y     match destination-as VAR_AS

                          This closely resembles the earlier custom variable–based filters in that
                     you pass traffic going to X and from the specified AS (Y). Now you can use
                     this filter to get the traffic to a particular autonomous system.

                     # flow-cat * | flow-nfilter -F as-traffic -v AS=701 | flow-print -f 4 | less

                          When you apply this filter, you’ll see only the flows involving AS
                     number 701.
                          At this point, you should be able to filter traffic in any way you like. Now
                     let’s run analysis on that data.

80   Chapter 4                              Network Flow Analysis
                                        (C) 2010 by Michael W. Lucas
