           Putting links at the bottom of a passage nudges the player to make a
       choice. They read through the entire passage, and when they reach the
       link list at the bottom, they choose an action.
           By setting all the options together in a single list, the player can more
       easily see how their choices will have different consequences.


       Exploring a Space
       You can also use links throughout your passages to describe the player’s
       environment. For example, here’s a description of the monster’s home in
       Spider Milk.




           In this passage, the links are objects the players notice as they look
       around the room. When you place links in the middle of a paragraph,
       you show the player what to explore, such as the chandelier in Spider
       Milk.
           For example, clicking chandelier shows the player a chandelier
       and a single Back link at the bottom of the page. The Back link takes the
       player back to the previous passage so they can click pillows or candles,
       or just finish their tea. These extra details make your game more fun
       and engaging.




22   Make Your Own Twine Games
     When the player is done looking around the monster’s home, they
need to decide which link to click to move the story forward.
     To help the player decide how to move to the next passage, we can
hint that the tea link is the end of this scene by setting it apart from the
other links. Conversely, we place the chandelier, pillows, and candles links
in the same paragraph to make them seem similar to each other.
     The tea link is the only sentence in the passage that refers to time
and has a sense of urgency: “Are you going to drink your tea before
it gets cold?” The other links are just objects to look at, so the tea link
invites the player to move forward.
     When you’re making games, think about how to present your game
to affect the player’s experience. Even where links appear in a passage
can affect how the player makes decisions.




  Chapter 2 Spider Milk: Weaving a Story with Links                   23
Arranging Your Passages
       In the previous chapter, we compared the Interview with a Cat! game to a
       blueprint for a house. Houses come in all sizes: tiny ones with just a few
       rooms and big, luxurious mansions with patios, verandas, and secret
       passages—like the kind you’ll buy when you’re a rich and famous game
       designer.
           As you’re creating a Twine game, you can move passages around
       by clicking and dragging them at any time. How you arrange your
       passages can change the flow of your story and your perspective on it.
       For example, here’s the blueprint from part of Interview with a Cat!




            To make the interview with Encyclopedia Frown more formal, I could
       have lined up all the passages. But I didn’t want to, because the inter-
       view is meant to be more like a friendly conversation. To create that
       feeling, I made the passages crisscross and connect in different ways.
            When you’re adding passages to your Twine games, think of your
       story as a house and your players as visitors. Where should your visi-
       tors go when they step into your game? How do they get around? Twine




24   Make Your Own Twine Games
makes it easy to see your story as a map. Take advantage of this feature
when you’re thinking about your game’s layout.


Sample Layout of a Twine Game
Let’s walk through how we might think about writing a game set at a party
in a mansion. Maybe the entrance to the mansion is a grand entry foyer: a
big, fancy room designed to impress visitors. But there’s nothing for a player
to do in the foyer other than hang up their coats: it’s a place of transitions.
      The foyer draws the player forward toward the center of the house.
They step into the main hall, another big room, full of people. A party is
going on here with lots of people mingling and introducing themselves.
It’s loud and crowded. The player can’t really get to know anyone here,
but there are doors leading to smaller, more intimate side rooms.
      In these side rooms, the player can stop and take in some of the details
around them. They can have meaningful conversations here as well. Maybe
they’ll stumble upon secret passages in some of these rooms. Perhaps there’s
a secret door that leads from one room to another on the other side of the
house or to a secret place they can’t get to any other way. Maybe your
player can find a little door to a backyard where they can get away from
the party and look at the stars for a while. The possibilities are endless!
      When your player finds their way back to the main hall eventually,
perhaps many of the guests have moved to other parts of the mansion.
Now they should have a better sense of the house’s layout and might
decide to check out another wing.




  Chapter 2 Spider Milk: Weaving a Story with Links                     25
           When the player decides they’ve seen enough, they might return
       to the foyer to leave the mansion. But because they’ve seen so many
       rooms in the mansion, they might think the foyer doesn’t look so big
       and imposing anymore. Passing through the entryway on their way
       out, the player remembers what it looked like when they first arrived
       and can reflect on how their impression has changed. They retrieve
       their coat. It’s time to go home.




       Determining the Shape and
       Size of Your Game
       Twine stories come in all shapes and sizes. Not all of them are like mansions
       with rooms to explore. Some are like waterfalls with only one main path,
       and all other paths branch off that path. Some are like gardens or caves.
           When you come up with the shape of your Twine game, decide what
       kind of story would fit that shape. What would a robot tea party look
       like or a monster at the grocery store, or what happens to missing socks?
           Pay attention to where paths split and then meet again. For ­example,
       some stories branch like a tree and never come back together, which means
       your story can have different endings. Some stories are like chain links: they
       come apart, come back together, come apart again, and then come back
       together again, creating different paths to the same ending. Others can be
       straight lines, and some are like meandering rivers. Try to make stories with
       interesting shapes, like the one shown in the following figure.



26   Make Your Own Twine Games
                                 Nudging players
                                 toward an ending

     Picture an action movie. The hero sees the villain on the roof of a
tall building, probably laughing like a villain. We know that the scene
is going to end with the hero confronting the villain, but how does the
hero get there?
     In our story, maybe the player chooses between running up the fire
escape or taking the express elevator, but both branches lead to the
exciting confrontation. Thoughtful story structuring allows us to nudge
the player toward the scenes we decide are the most important, even if
there are a few ways to get there.
     Some Twine games are like gardens that players can wander in.




                                  A more open-­ended game




  Chapter 2 Spider Milk: Weaving a Story with Links                 27
           In this game shape, the player can roam through a garden looking
       at pretty flowers and trees, but most gardens don’t have an ending. The
       player can leave the garden whenever they’ve seen enough, and maybe
       by the time they’ve walked around the entire garden, they’ll feel like
       they know something about the person who planted it.
           Some Twine games are like deep, winding caves with multiple paths
       that all lead to the same place.




                                                 Multiple paths leading to
                                                 the same place




28   Make Your Own Twine Games
        For example, the paths in a cave can wind around and loop back
    in on themselves. The player can go deeper and deeper into it until they
    run out of light. They’ll need to feel their way along the walls with their
    hands, not sure where they’re going. They can continue down differ-
    ent paths until they’re lost. At some point, the branches might come
    back together, but the player might not notice, because it’s too dark. The
    player keeps moving forward, and when they least expect it, they see
    light again!
        These are just some examples of different structures you can use in
    your games.




Emphasizing Text
    You can style the words in your stories using italics, bold, or underlines
    to emphasize certain items or to change the way they look and feel. Let’s
    look at how to do this.



        Note: To learn more about ways to mark up text in your
        stories, view the Help option in Twine.




    Italicizing
    Italics are an easy way to emphasize important words in a sentence. To
    italicize text, place an asterisk (*) on either side of the text you want to
    italicize. For example, enter the following in Twine:

    "I don't know about *you* but *I* like a lot of pickles on my
    sandwiches. A *lot* of pickles."

        The resulting text will look like this in your game.




      Chapter 2 Spider Milk: Weaving a Story with Links                    29
