      Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka




          ENCODER- AND DECODER-STYLE
                                    17
                TRANSFORMERS



                          What are the differences between encoder-
                         and decoder-based language transformers?
                   Both encoder- and decoder-style architectures use the same self-
              attention layers to encode word tokens. The main difference is that
        encoders are designed to learn embeddings that can be used for various
        predictive modeling tasks such as classification. In contrast, decoders are
        designed to generate new texts, for example, to answer user queries.
            This chapter starts by describing the original transformer architecture
        consisting of an encoder that processes input text and a decoder that pro-
        duces translations. The subsequent sections then describe how models like
        BERT and RoBERTa utilize only the encoder to understand context and
        how the GPT architectures emphasize decoder-only mechanisms for text
        generation.


The Original Transformer
        The original transformer architecture introduced in Chapter 16 was devel-
        oped for English-to-French and English-to-German language translation. It
        utilized both an encoder and a decoder, as illustrated in Figure 17-1.
                     Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka


                                                                            Fully connected
                                                                                 network
                                                                                                  Decoder


                                                                              LayerNorm


                                                                                  +
           Encoder                                                          Fully connected
                                                                                 network


                             LayerNorm                                       LayerNorm


                                  +                                               +                         6x

                            Fully connected                                  Multi-head
                                 network                                     attention
      6x

                             LayerNorm                                       LayerNorm


                                  +                                               +
                             Multi-head                                      Multi-head
                             attention                                       attention




      Positional encoding         +                   Positional encoding         +

                             Embeddings                                     Embeddings


                            Tokenized text                                  Tokenized text

                                      Tokenizer                                       Tokenizer
                              Input text                                      Input text

Figure 17-1: The original transformer architecture

                            In Figure 17-1, the input text (that is, the sentences of the text to be trans-
                       lated) is first tokenized into individual word tokens, which are then encoded
                       via an embedding layer before they enter the encoder part (see Chapter 1 for
                       more on embeddings). After a positional encoding vector is added to each
                       embedded word, the embeddings go through a multi-head self-attention
                       layer. This layer is followed by an addition step, indicated by a plus sign (+)
                       in Figure 17-1, which performs a layer normalization and adds the original

106     Chapter 17
Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka

  embeddings via a skip connection, also known as a residual or shortcut con-
  nection. Following this is a LayerNorm block, short for layer normalization,
  which normalizes the activations of the previous layer to improve the stabil-
  ity of the neural network’s training. The addition of the original embeddings
  and the layer normalization steps are often summarized as the Add & Norm
  step. Finally, after entering the fully connected network—a small, multilayer
  perceptron consisting of two fully connected layers with a nonlinear activa-
  tion function in between—the outputs are again added and normalized before
  they are passed to a multi-head self-attention layer of the decoder.
       The decoder in Figure 17-1 has a similar overall structure to the en-
  coder. The key difference is that the inputs and outputs are different: the
  encoder receives the input text to be translated, while the decoder generates
  the translated text.


  Encoders
  The encoder part in the original transformer, as illustrated in Figure 17-1, is
  responsible for understanding and extracting the relevant information from
  the input text. It then outputs a continuous representation (embedding)
  of the input text, which is passed to the decoder. Finally, the decoder gener-
  ates the translated text (target language) based on the continuous represen-
  tation received from the encoder.
       Over the years, various encoder-only architectures have been developed
  based on the encoder module of the original transformer model outlined
  earlier. One notable example is BERT, which stands for bidirectional en-
  coder representations from transformers.
       As noted in Chapter 14, BERT is an encoder-only architecture based
  on the transformer’s encoder module. The BERT model is pretrained on a
  large text corpus using masked language modeling and next-sentence predic-
  tion tasks. Figure 17-2 illustrates the masked language modeling pretraining
  objective used in BERT-style transformers.


      Input sentence: The curious kitten deftly climbed the bookshelf



                      (1) Pick 15 percent of the words randomly


                          The curious kitten deftly climbed the bookshelf



                      (2) • 80 percent of the time, replace with [MASK] token
                          • 10 percent of the time, replace with random token (for example, ate)
                          • 10 percent of the time, keep unchanged

  Modified sentence: The curious kitten deftly [MASK] the bookshelf


  Figure 17-2: BERT randomly masks 15 percent of the input tokens during pretraining.
                                                             Encoder- and Decoder-Style Transformers   107
                   Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka

                          As Figure 17-2 demonstrates, the main idea behind masked language
                     modeling is to mask (or replace) random word tokens in the input sequence
                     and then train the model to predict the original masked tokens based on the
                     surrounding context.
                          In addition to the masked language modeling pretraining task illustrated
                     in Figure 17-2, the next-sentence prediction task asks the model to predict
                     whether the original document’s sentence order of two randomly shuffled
                     sentences is correct. For example, say that two sentences, in random order,
                     are separated by the [SEP] token (SEP is short for separate). The brackets are
                     a part of the token’s notation and are used to make it clear that this is a spe-
                     cial token as opposed to a regular word in the text. BERT-style transformers
                     also use a [CLS] token. The [CLS] token serves as a placeholder token for
                     the model, prompting the model to return a True or False label indicating
                     whether the sentences are in the correct order:
                         •    “[CLS] Toast is a simple yet delicious food. [SEP] It’s often served
                              with butter, jam, or honey.”
                         •    “[CLS] It’s often served with butter, jam, or honey. [SEP] Toast is a
                              simple yet delicious food.”
                          The masked language and next-sentence pretraining objectives allow
                     BERT to learn rich contextual representations of the input texts, which can
                     then be fine-tuned for various downstream tasks like sentiment analysis,
                     question answering, and named entity recognition. It’s worth noting that
                     this pretraining is a form of self-supervised learning (see Chapter 2 for more
                     details on this type of learning).
                          RoBERTa, which stands for robustly optimized BERT approach, is an
                     improved version of BERT. It maintains the same overall architecture as
                     BERT but employs several training and optimization improvements, such
                     as larger batch sizes, more training data, and eliminating the next-sentence
                     prediction task. These changes have resulted in RoBERTa achieving better
                     performance on various natural language understanding tasks than BERT.


                     Decoders
                     Coming back to the original transformer architecture outlined in Figure 17-1,
                     the multi-head self-attention mechanism in the decoder is similar to the one
                     in the encoder, but it is masked to prevent the model from attending to fu-
                     ture positions, ensuring that the predictions for position i can depend only
                     on the known outputs at positions less than i. As illustrated in Figure 17-3,
                     the decoder generates the output word by word.




108   Chapter 17
                           Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka



   (1)                                                           (2)                                 Uebersetze
                                          Uebersetze
                                          …                                                          Wort
                                          …                                                          …
                                          …                                                          …



                     Encoder               Decoder                       Encoder                       Decoder



         Translate                         [START]                     Translate                        [START]
             word                         [MASK]                          word
                                          [MASK]                                                     Uebersetze
                by                                                           by
             word
                                          [MASK]                          word                         [MASK]
                                                                                                       [MASK]

   (4)                                    Uebersetze             (3)                                 Uebersetze
                                          Wort                                                       Wort
                                          fuer                                                       fuer
                                          Wort                                                       …



                     Encoder               Decoder                      Encoder                        Decoder



                      word                   [START]                   Translate                        [START]


         Translate
                        by
                                          Uebersetze                       word                      Uebersetze
                      word                                                    by
                                               Wort                        word                           Wort
                                                fuer                                                    [MASK]

Figure 17-3: The next-sentence prediction task used in the original transformer

                                   This masking (shown explicitly in Figure 17-3, although it occurs inter-
                               nally in the decoder’s multi-head self-attention mechanism) is essential to
                               maintaining the transformer model’s autoregressive property during train-
                               ing and inference. This autoregressive property ensures that the model gen-
                               erates output tokens one at a time and uses previously generated tokens as
                               context for generating the next word token.
                                   Over the years, researchers have built upon the original encoder-decoder
                               transformer architecture and developed several decoder-only models that
                               have proven highly effective in various natural language processing tasks. The
                               most notable models include the GPT family, which we briefly discussed in
                               Chapter 14 and in various other chapters throughout the book.




                                                                                   Encoder- and Decoder-Style Transformers   109
                    Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka

                           GPT stands for generative pretrained transformer. The GPT series com-
                      prises decoder-only models pretrained on large-scale unsupervised text data
                      and fine-tuned for specific tasks such as text classification, sentiment analy-
                      sis, question answering, and summarization. The GPT models, including at
                      the time of writing GPT-2, GPT-3, and GPT-4, have shown remarkable per-
                      formance in various benchmarks and are currently the most popular archi-
                      tecture for natural language processing.
                           One of the most notable aspects of GPT models is their emergent prop-
                      erties. Emergent properties are the abilities and skills that a model devel-
                      ops due to its next-word prediction pretraining. Even though these models
                      were taught only to predict the next word, the pretrained models are capa-
                      ble of text summarization, translation, question answering, classification,
                      and more. Furthermore, these models can perform new tasks without up-
                      dating the model parameters via in-context learning, which we’ll discuss in
                      more detail in Chapter 18.

      Encoder-Decoder Hybrids
                      Next to the traditional encoder and decoder architectures, there have been
                      advancements in the development of new encoder-decoder models that lev-
                      erage the strengths of both components. These models often incorporate
                      novel techniques, pretraining objectives, or architectural modifications to
                      enhance their performance in various natural language processing tasks.
                      Some notable examples of these new encoder-decoder models include
                      BART and T5.
                          Encoder-decoder models are typically used for natural language pro-
                      cessing tasks that involve understanding input sequences and generating
                      output sequences, often with different lengths and structures. They are
                      particularly good at tasks where there is a complex mapping between the
                      input and output sequences and where it is crucial to capture the relation-
                      ships between the elements in both sequences. Some common use cases for
                      encoder-decoder models include text translation and summarization.

      Terminology
                      All of these methods—encoder-only, decoder-only, and encoder-decoder
                      models—are sequence-to-sequence models (often abbreviated as seq2seq).
                      While we refer to BERT-style methods as “encoder-only,” the description
                      may be misleading since these methods also decode the embeddings into out-
                      put tokens or text during pretraining. In other words, both encoder-only
                      and decoder-only architectures perform decoding.
                           However, the encoder-only architectures, in contrast to decoder-only
                      and encoder-decoder architectures, don’t decode in an autoregressive fash-
                      ion. Autoregressive decoding refers to generating output sequences one to-
                      ken at a time, conditioning each token on the previously generated tokens.
                      Encoder-only models do not generate coherent output sequences in this
                      manner. Instead, they focus on understanding the input text and producing
                      task-specific outputs, such as labels or token predictions.

110    Chapter 17
      Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka

Contemporary Transformer Models
        In brief, encoder-style models are popular for learning embeddings used
        in classification tasks, encoder-decoder models are used in generative tasks
        where the output heavily relies on the input (for example, translation and
        summarization), and decoder-only models are used for other types of gener-
        ative tasks, including Q&A. Since the first transformer architecture emerged,
        hundreds of encoder-only, decoder-only, and encoder-decoder hybrids have
        been developed, as diagrammed in Figure 17-4.

                                                  Microsoft          DeBERTa (2020)
                                                                  BERT (2018)
                                     Encoder      Google
                                                                  ALBERT (2020)
                                                  Meta          RoBERTa (2019)
                                                                       GPT-J (2021)
                                                  Eleuther AI          GPT-NeoX (2022)
                                                                       GPT-Neo (2023)
                                                                  XLNet (2019)
                                                                  LaMDA (2021)
                                                                  PaLM (2022)
                                                                  Gopher (2022)
                                                  Google
                                                                  Sparrow (2022)
                                                                  Chinchilla (2022)
                                                                  Minerva (2022)
         Original transformer        Decoder                      Bard (2023)
                                                                   GPT-1 (2018)
                                                                   GPT-2 (2019)
                                                                   GPT-3 (2020)
                                                  OpenAI           CodeX (2021)
                                                                   InstructGPT (2022)
                                                                   ChatGPT (2022)
                                                                   GPT-4 (2023)
                                                                OPT (2022)
                                                  Meta          Galactica (2022)
                                                                LLaMA (2023)
                                                           Meta            BART (2020)
                                     Encoder-Decoder                         Flan-T5 (2022)
                                                           Google            Flan-UL2 (2023)
                                                                             T5 (2022)

        Figure 17-4: Some of the most popular large language transformers organized by
        architecture type and developer

             While encoder-only models have gradually become less popular, decoder-
        only models like GPT have exploded in popularity, thanks to breakthroughs
        in text generation via GPT-3, ChatGPT, and GPT-4. However, encoder-only

                                                                Encoder- and Decoder-Style Transformers   111
                    Machine Learning Q and AI (Sample Chapter) ©1/23/24 by Sebastian Raschka

                      models are still very useful for training predictive models based on text em-
                      beddings as opposed to generating texts.

      Exercises
                    17-1. As discussed in this chapter, BERT-style encoder models are pretrained
                          using masked language modeling and next-sentence prediction pretrain-
                          ing objectives. How could we adopt such a pretrained model for a clas-
                          sification task (for example, predicting whether a text has a positive or
                          negative sentiment)?
                    17-2. Can we fine-tune a decoder-only model like GPT for classification?


      References
                          •    The Bahdanau attention mechanism for RNNs: Dzmitry Bahdanau,
                               Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio, “Neural Machine Translation
                               by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate” (2014), https://arxiv.org/
                               abs/1409.0473.
                          •    The original BERT paper, which popularized encoder-style trans-
                               formers with a masked word and a next-sentence prediction pre-
                               training objective: Jacob Devlin et al., “BERT: Pre-training of Deep
                               Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding” (2018),
                               https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805.
                          •    RoBERTa improves upon BERT by optimizing training procedures,
                               using larger training datasets, and removing the next-sentence pred-
                               iction task: Yinhan Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT
                               Pretraining Approach” (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.11692.
                          •    The BART encoder-decoder architecture: Mike Lewis et al., “BART:
                               Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language
                               Generation, Translation, and Comprehension” (2018), https://arxiv
                               .org/abs/1910.13461.
                          •    The T5 encoder-decoder architecture: Colin Raffel et al., “Exploring
                               the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Trans-
                               former” (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683.
                          •    The paper proposing the first GPT architecture: Alec Radford et al.,
                               “Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training”
                               (2018), https://cdn.openai.com/research-covers/language-unsupervised/
                               language_understanding_paper.pdf.
                          •    The GPT-2 model: Alec Radford et al., “Language Models Are Unsu-
                               pervised Multitask Learners” (2019), https://www.semanticscholar.org/
                               paper/Language-Models-are-Unsupervised-Multitask-Learners-Radford
                               -Wu/9405cc0d6169988371b2755e573cc28650d14dfe.
                          •    The GPT-3 model: Tom B. Brown et al., “Language Models Are Few-
                               Shot Learners” (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.


112    Chapter 17
