                                4
                           MOVIE CGI




            Some of software’s most impressive work
            can be seen in movie theaters. Images that
           in earlier eras were painstakingly produced
         with models, matte paintings, elaborate cos-
tumes, and trick photography are now created by com-
puters. More than merely simplifying the filmmaking
process, computer-generated imagery (CGI) produces images that would have
been impossible before. For many filmgoers, movies changed forever when
they saw Jurassic Park. When Steven Spielberg was developing the movie, he
expected to create his dinosaurs using old-school effects like automated pup-
pets and animated miniatures, but once he saw some computer-animated test
footage, he decided to use CGI for many of the dinosaur shots. The result
left viewers astounded by images like the panorama shown in Figure 4-1. For
comparison, the old way to put a dinosaur in a movie is shown in Figure 4-2.




                    How Software Works
                  © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                 Figure 4-1: CGI dinosaurs visit the watering hole in Jurassic Park (Universal Pictures/
                 Amblin Entertainment, 1993).




                 Figure 4-2: The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms (Jack Dietz Productions, 1953) munches
                 on Coney Island.

                     Amazing as they were, films like Jurassic Park were just the beginning of
                 the CGI revolution. Now movies like Avatar create whole worlds using CGI,
                 so that viewers are never sure what parts of a shot are physically real, if any.
                 With enough time and money, it seems like filmmakers can produce any-
                 thing imaginable.


58   Chapter 4                            How Software Works
                                        © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
            Before computers blew our minds with dinosaurs and lush alien planets,
        though, they were transforming the world of traditionally animated movies.
        Using computers not only radically altered the process of traditional anima-
        tion, but as you’ll discover, the concepts and techniques employed are the
        foundation for almost everything in computer graphics. This is where the
        story of CGI begins.


Software for Traditional Animation
        A movie is a series of still images, or frames, presented to the eye in rapid
        succession, like a high-speed slideshow. Each frame lingers on the retina for
        a moment after it disappears from the screen, effectively blending with the
        next frame to provide the illusion of continuous motion—a phenomenon
        known as persistence of vision. Traditionally, movies are shown at a rate of
        24 frames per second (fps). Making a movie means producing 24 images
        for every second of the film.
              A live-action movie uses a camera to collect images in real time. A tra-
        ditionally animated film like Lady and the Tramp, though, is created a bit
        differently: each frame of the movie is an individually photographed, hand-
        crafted work of art.
              Traditional animation is a huge undertaking requiring a large team
        of artists. Typically, each character in an animated film is assigned a lead
        animator, but the lead animator does not draw the character on every frame
        in which he or she appears, because that’s too much work for one person.
        Instead, the lead animator draws only as many keyframes as are needed to
        suggest the action—perhaps one out of every few dozen frames of a finished
        animation sequence. Other animators draw the in-between frames to com-
        plete the sequence, a process known as tweening. At this stage, the animation
        is still just a series of pencil drawings on paper. The drawings must be trans-
        ferred to transparent cellulose sheets, which is why this style of animation
        is also known as cel animation. Then comes what animators call “ink and
        paint”: the faint pencil lines are traced over with black ink, and the cel is
        colored. Then the sheets are placed in front of a separately painted back-
        ground and photographed.
              As you might expect, tweening, inking, and painting are tedious, time-
        intensive jobs. Beginning around 1990, computer imagery has been used to
        mimic the cel animation style with far less manual labor.

        How Digital Images Work
        In a traditional animated film, each frame is a photograph of physical art,
        but computer animation works with digital images—pictures defined by
        numerical data.
            When you look at a video display such as a television, a smartphone screen,
        or a digitally projected theater screen, the image that reaches your eyes is
        made up of dots of varying colors, known as pixels. Figure 4-3 depicts a tree
        against a blue sky as a grid of pixels. Each of the 100 pixels in this 10×10
        grid is assigned a color, here specified by name.

                             How Software Works                            Movie CGI   59
                           © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                 Sky Blue



                                                             Leafy Green




                                      Bark Brown

                 Figure 4-3: A tree made of pixels

                      Although we can think of each pixel as a solid
                 color, the underlying reality is a bit different. For
                 example, at home you might watch a movie on a com-
                 mon liquid crystal display (LCD) television in which
                 pixel colors are determined by electrically controlled
                 crystals. On the back of an LCD screen is a light
                 source, either a fluorescent lamp or a series of light-
                                                                                Red Green Blue
                 emitting diodes (LEDs). The light source itself is white.
                 In front of the light is a translucent panel with bars in    Figure 4-4: Three
                 the three primary colors—red, green, and blue—as             bars of pure primary
                 shown in Figure 4-4.                                         colors create one
                      A layer of liquid crystals lying between the light      LCD pixel.
                 source and the color panel puts an individually con-
                 trolled crystal behind each of the translucent bars.
                 You can think of these crystals as electrically operated doors, and the
                 degree to which each crystal door is open determines how much light gets
                 through. By varying the amount of red, green, or blue, any one of millions
                 of colors can be produced by each pixel. This is additive color mixing, in
                 which adding more color makes the result brighter. If we want a particular
                 pixel to come across as bright yellow, for example, we would set the levels of
                 red and green high, and the level of blue low. If we wanted a dark gray, we
                 would set each of the color bars to the same low intensity. All three colors at
                 maximum intensity produce pure white. Later in this chapter, we’ll see an
                 example of subtractive color mixing, which is what you might remember from
                 art class, where adding more color makes the result darker.

                 How Colors Are Defined
                 The most common way to define a pixel’s color is with the RGB system,
                 which uses three numbers to represent the intensity of red, green, and blue
                 in the pixel. The numbers typically range from 0 to 255 to match the range
                 of an eight-bit byte. This means that each RGB pixel is specified by three
                 bytes of data.



60   Chapter 4                           How Software Works
                                       © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
    As far as software is concerned, a digital image such as that shown in
Figure 4-3 is just a list of bytes of color data, three bytes for each pixel. This
block of bytes is known as the image’s bitmap. The first three bytes in the
bitmap are the red, green, and blue levels of the pixel in the upper-left cor-
ner of the image, and so on. The width and height of an image or bitmap in
pixels is known as its resolution; for instance, Figure 4-3’s resolution is 10×10.
A bitmap called a display buffer stores the colors of each pixel of a digital
display like an LCD television; ultimately, computer graphics methods are
about setting the numbers in a display buffer.
    The location of a particular pixel in a bitmap is specified by two coordi-
nates, an x-coordinate for horizontal position and a y-coordinate for verti-
cal position. The (0,0) coordinate, known as the origin, can be located in a
corner or in the center; it varies among different coordinate systems. When
positioning pixels on a physical display, we refer to coordinates as screen coor-
dinates. Screen coordinate systems commonly set the origin at the upper-left
pixel, so a 1920×1080 screen would locate pixels as shown in Figure 4-5.
Here, the y-axis increases moving down the image, the x-axis increases mov-
ing right across the image, and the center location is (960, 540).
x: 0 y: 0


                                 x:960 y: 540




                        x:1919 y: 1079

Figure 4-5: Locating pixels on a 1920×1080 screen

    Coordinate systems are a ubiquitous part of computer graphics and,
as you’ll see in this chapter and the next, much of the work of producing
graphics involves converting coordinates from one system to another.

How Software Makes Cel Animations
Now that you understand what’s inside a digital image, you’re ready to see
how software can make digital images that look like traditional cels. The
first step is getting the artist’s work inside the computer.

Transforming Drawings into Models
Software-generated cel animation starts the same way as traditional ani-
mation: with an artist sketching a character. Instead of drawing on paper,
though, the artist draws with a mouse or an electronic stylus and the draw-
ings are recorded by software. In order to ultimately produce a bitmapped
image, we need a system that defines the artist’s strokes numerically,



                      How Software Works                             Movie CGI   61
                    © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                 producing a model of the drawing. Locations within a model are called
                 local coordinates. Figure 4-6 shows a drawing of a bug-man within a box that
                 defines the local coordinate space.

                 x: 0 y: 0




                                                                                     x:1000 y: 1000



                 Figure 4-6: A bug-man drawing inside a box defining coordinate limits

                      Each line and curve in this model is defined in terms of these local
                 coordinates. Straight line segments, like the antennae and legs of our charac-
                 ter, can be defined by the coordinates of the points at either end of the line,
                 as shown in Figure 4-7. Note that the coordinates here have fractional parts
                 to increase precision.
                                         x: 450.46 y: 105.33




                 x: 455.77 y: 201.98

                                                x: 486.07 y: 230.46

                 Figure 4-7: Defining straight line segments using the
                 coordinates of the end points

                      For curves, control points are needed in addition to end points to define
                 the direction and amount of curvature. Imagine that the control point is
                 attached to the curve so that moving it controls the degree of curvature, as
                 illustrated by the simple curves in Figure 4-8. If you’ve ever worked with a
                 vector graphics application, you’ve likely worked with curves like this.




62   Chapter 4                            How Software Works
                                        © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
Figure 4-8: Curves defined by two end points and one control point

     Simple curves can be represented by just
two end points and one control point, but
longer, more complicated curves are made
up of sequences of simple curves, as shown
with the bug-man’s shoe in Figure 4-9.
     The lines and curves define just the                  Figure 4-9: A complicated
outline of a character or other drawing; the               curve made of simple curves
colors inside the outline are defined using a
system such as RGB. The character model,
then, is a numerical representation of all the
lines, curves, and color data.

Automatic Tweening
Numerically defining drawings allows for automatic tweening. The animator
draws one frame of a character’s animation sequence, then creates succeed-
ing keyframes by moving the control points of the curves in the previous
frames. The animation software can then generate the other frames through
interpolation. The concept is demonstrated in Figure 4-10. Here, the coor-
dinates of the middle point are calculated as the average of the coordinates
of the other points. The x-coordinate of the interpolated point, 20, is halfway
between 10 and 30; the y-coordinate, 120, is halfway between 100 and 140. In
this example, all the points lie on a line, but the interpolation path can be a
curve as well.
Keyframe 1 Point (10,100)




                                      Interpolated Point (20,120)




                 Keyframe 2 Point (30,140)

Figure 4-10: Computing a middle point between two keyframe
points via interpolation




                       How Software Works                                  Movie CGI   63
                     © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                     Figure 4-11 shows how interpolation creates new frames of animation.
                 The leftmost face is the original model; the second face shows some of the
                 control points; and the third has a wide mouth created by repositioning two
                 of the control points downward. The rightmost face was created through
                 linear interpolation, placing each control point halfway between the two
                 keyframe positions. Animation software can create as many in-between
                 positions as necessary to fill the gap between keyframes.




                 Figure 4-11: From left: a model, the model with selected control points, the model with two
                 of the control points moved, and a tweened model created by interpolation between the
                 positions of the previous two models

                     Although basic interpolation tweening can be a huge time-saver, adjust-
                 ing the positions of lots of little points remains tedious. More advanced
                 animation software can treat a character drawing as a complete, intercon-
                 nected body, in which rigid connections and joints are specified. This
                 means that an animator need only position the feet for each keyframe to
                 make our bug-man walk, and the software positions the rest of the legs
                 accordingly. The software might even handle real-world physics, so that a
                 sequence of images of our bug-man falling over a log could be animated
                 entirely by the software.


                 Positioning and Scaling
                 Numerical modeling also allows the drawings to be placed anywhere in
                 a frame at any size. Changing the size of a model is called scaling, and is
                 accomplished by multiplying or dividing the coordinates for each of the
                 points. Figure 4-12 shows the bug-man model of Figure 4-6 scaled down
                 to a quarter of its original area by dividing each of the coordinates in half.
                 One point on his antenna is highlighted to show the idea.
                      Placing a model in a particular location on the screen is called transla-
                 tion, and is accomplished by increasing or decreasing coordinates by fixed
                 amounts. In Figure 4-13, the shrunken bug-man from Figure 4-12 is trans-
                 lated to the middle of the screen by adding 700 to each x-coordinate and
                 200 to each y-coordinate.




64   Chapter 4                               How Software Works
                                           © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                Original Model                              Scaled-Down Model


Local 0,0                   Local 580,210



                                                        Local 0,0     Local 290,105




                                                                        Local 500,500



                                 Local 1000,1000

Figure 4-12: Scaling a model means multiplying or dividing each of the coordinates.

Screen 0,0           Local 0,0           Local 290,105
                  Screen 700,200        Screen 990,305




                                  Local 500,500
                                 Screen 1200,700     Screen 1919,1079

Figure 4-13: Translating a model means adding to or subtracting from coordinates.


“Ink and Paint” for Digital Images
Now that the points on the models are mapped to screen coordinates, it’s
time to transform each frame into a bitmap. This is the software version of
cel animation’s “ink and paint.” To keep things simple, let’s look at how just
the right arm of our bug-man model would be converted to a bitmap, or
rasterized, when displayed over a solid white background. Figure 4-14 shows
the arm over a pixel grid, with circles marking the pixel centers.


                       How Software Works                                  Movie CGI   65
                     © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                      With the model mathematically defined, the software can place the
                 arm at any position on the bitmap and then apply the indicated color—in
                 this case, black—to the appropriate pixels. Right away we see there’s a prob-
                 lem, though: the contours of the arm don’t match the borders of pixels, so
                 how do we determine which pixels to color? A simple rule is to color pixels
                 when their centers are covered. Figure 4-15 shows the result of pixel-center
                 coloring.




                 Figure 4-14: The right arm         Figure 4-15: Coloring pixels
                 of the bug-man super-              solid black based on pixel
                 imposed over a pixel grid          centers


                      As you can see, though, this result is rather ugly. Because the pixels
                 are square, this coloring rule replaces the gracefully curving border of the
                 model with a jagged edge, which is why this problem is known as the jaggies.
                 The general problem is that the model is smooth and continuous, while the
                 bitmap is made with square black-and-white pixels. The bitmap is just an
                 approximation of the model. The discrepancy between continuous models
                 and their bitmap approximations is known as aliasing, and is the source of
                 many visual anomalies in computer graphics.
                      To avoid the jaggies, we need to color pixels using an anti-aliasing tech-
                 nique. In our example, instead of coloring the pixels black and white, we’ll
                 use a range of grays to produce a better approximation of the model. Each
                 pixel will be colored based on how much of it is covered by the arm.
                      In order to put this idea into action, instead of checking only the center
                 of each pixel, let’s test several points in each pixel to see how many of them
                 lie within the model. In Figure 4-16, 7 of the 10 testing points scattered
                 around the pixel area are covered by the shape, meaning this is 70 percent
                 coverage.
                      The percentage of each pixel covered by the model determines the gray
                 level. The result for our bug-man’s arm is shown in Figure 4-17. Although
                 this example might not look like much, if you hold the page at arm’s length
                 and squint, the edges should appear to smoothly blend into the white back-
                 ground, producing the illusion of a graceful curve.




66   Chapter 4                           How Software Works
                                       © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
Figure 4-16: A close-up            Figure 4-17: Using grayscale to anti-
of one pixel at the end of         alias, shown with and without the
the bug-man’s arm, with            pixel grid.
a scattering of 10 points
to estimate the area cov-
ered by the model


Blending into Any Background
We need to generalize the technique just described in order for it to work
with a background other than solid white. Consider Figure 4-18. On the
left is the bug-man model, and in the middle is the background for the
shot in which he’ll appear: a close-up of a setting sun over a rocky terrain.
On the right is the complete image with the model superimposed over the
background.
Model                 Background                    Model over Background




Figure 4-18: The bug-man model, a background, and the model superimposed over
the background

    This book is printed in black and white, but in this image the sun would
be shades of reddish-orange and the ground would be shades of brown. As
before, pixels along the model’s edge will appear jagged unless we use an
anti-aliasing technique. But using the previous technique to color pixels in
gray tones won’t help the black edge blend into a background of red-orange
and brown pixels.
    A more general anti-aliasing technique calculates an alpha level for each
pixel based on the percentage of the pixel that’s covered by the model. You
can think of an alpha level as a measure of opacity. Like the color levels, an
alpha level is typically defined in the range of 0–255. In Figure 4-19, a black




                       How Software Works                                  Movie CGI   67
                     © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                 bar is superimposed over a tree at different
                 alpha levels. At an alpha level of 255, the bar
                 is entirely opaque, while at 25 the bar is barely
                 visible. An alpha level of 0 would make the bar
                 completely invisible.
                      The alpha levels of all the pixels in a bitmap
                 are collectively referred to as its alpha channel.
                 The process of making an alpha channel for
                 a model is similar to how we anti-aliased the
                 black arm against the white background, only
                 rather than assigning a shade of gray based on       25     75 125 200 255
                 the pixel’s coverage percentage, we assign an
                 alpha value for the pixel instead. Each model        Figure 4-19: A tree covered
                 is thus conceptually transformed into both a         by five black bars of varying
                                                                      alpha level
                 bitmap, showing the color of each pixel covered
                 by the model, and an alpha channel, showing
                 the opacity of each pixel. Figure 4-20 shows the color bitmap (here, just black
                 pixels) and the alpha channel of the bug-man arm separately.

                          Model                   Color Bitmap              Alpha Channel




                 Figure 4-20: The arm of the bug-man model with its corresponding color bitmap and
                 alpha channel

                     Now the model can be applied to any background. The final color of
                 each pixel is a blend of the color in the background and the model’s color
                 bitmap, with the alpha level determining how much of each color goes into
                 the mix. In the bug-man scene of Figure 4-18, if a black bug-man pixel with
                 30 percent alpha were placed on top of a red-orange sunset background
                 pixel, the result would be a darker red-orange, as shown in Figure 4-21. The
                 resulting amount of each color component lies somewhere between the two
                 mixed colors, but because the black pixel is only 30 percent alpha, the red-
                 orange background color dominates. For pixels completely covered by the
                 model, the alpha level is 100 percent and the color in the final image is the
                 same as in the model’s color bitmap. In this way, a bitmap with an alpha
                 channel can be smoothly blended into any background.




68   Chapter 4                          How Software Works
                                      © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                                       R              G              B

           Black, 30% Alpha
        Red-Orange, Opaque


                       Result

        Figure 4-21: The red, green, and blue components of three colors: the
        black of the model, the red-orange of the background pixel, and the
        result of mixing these two colors if the black has 30% alpha


        From Cel Animation Software to Rendered 2D Graphics
        These techniques are now the default way to produce cel-style animation,
        and software is as common a tool for animation studios as brushes and
        paper were in earlier generations. While some animation studios use pro-
        grams they developed themselves, most direct-to-video or television ani-
        mation and some feature films are made with off-the-shelf software. One
        such program, Toon Boom, has been used for television shows such as The
        Simpsons and Phineas and Ferb, while the artists at Studio Ghibli use a pro-
        gram called Toonz to animate such movies as Spirited Away.
             The usefulness of these techniques is not limited to filmmaking,
        though. More generally, the software techniques used to mimic tradi-
        tional cel-style animation are called two-dimensional graphics, or 2D
        graphics, because the control points for models are located with two coordi-
        nates, x and y. The general task of transforming models into final images
        is called rendering, and the software that performs the task is the renderer.
        Rendered 2D graphics are used throughout computing. Many video games,
        such as Angry Birds, use the cel-animation look. These rendering techniques
        are also used to display fonts and icons in applications such as browsers and
        word processors.
             Although rendered 2D graphics are ubiquitous in computing and can
        make great cel-style animations, creating the mind-blowing visuals of films
        like Avatar requires extending these ideas to three dimensions.


Software for 3D CGI
        Breathtaking CGI in films like Avatar use 3D graphics. The “3D” here doesn’t
        refer to simulated depth perception, like in a 3D movie, but rather to the
        three coordinates of each control point in the animation models: x- and
        y-coordinates for horizontal and vertical positioning and a z-coordinate to
        indicate depth. Figure 4-22 shows a three-dimensional model of a box with
        a highlighted point defined by x-, y-, and z-coordinates.




                                  How Software Works                            Movie CGI   69
                                © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                                   +y




                                             +z



                 –x

                                                      +x

                                                    x: 100
                         –z                         y: 0
                                  –y                z: –100


                 Figure 4-22: A box in three-dimensional space

                     As with 2D graphics, 3D graphics are all about rendering models into
                 bitmaps. The rendering methods that produce the most realistic results
                 require the most processing time. Movie CGI is impressive largely because
                 the renderer can process each frame for a very long time, resulting in the
                 high-quality result that I’ll call movie-quality rendering. We’ll discuss the keys
                 to movie-quality rendering in this chapter. Then, in Chapter 5, we’ll talk
                 about graphics for video games, and see how many of the techniques shown
                 here have to be modified, faked, or scrapped altogether when images must
                 be produced in real time in response to user interaction.

                 How 3D Scenes Are Described
                 3D models are built out of lines and curves just like 2D models, but these
                 lines and curves stretch across three dimensions instead of two. The box in
                 Figure 4-22 is a very simple model defined by eight points; the models used
                 in movie CGI tend to be complex, defined by hundreds, thousands, or even
                 tens of thousands of points. As with 2D rendering, models in 3D rendering
                 are defined by local coordinates. The points at the corners of the box in
                 Figure 4-22, for example, are defined relative to the local origin at the bot-
                 tom of the box.
                      While 2D rendering can directly map from local coordinates to screen
                 coordinates, 3D models are first placed into scenes in a virtual world that
                 has its own coordinate space called world coordinates. Designing a 3D scene
                 is the CGI equivalent of building a movie set. We can place as many models as
                 we want in the virtual world, of any size and at any location, and the renderer
                 can figure out the world coordinates for all the locations on the models.
                      Introducing another coordinate system might seem like an unnecessary
                 complication, but world coordinates actually make 3D graphics much easier
                 in the long run. For example, an artist can model a dining room chair inde-
                 pendently of the other models for the scene in which it will be used. Then
                 the artist can copy the single chair model to make as many seats as needed




70   Chapter 4                            How Software Works
                                        © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
for the dining room scene. Also, a scene, like a movie set, isn’t built to pro-
duce a single image but to create a space that will be shown in many images
from many different angles, as we’ll see in the next section.

The Virtual Camera
With the scenery in place, a viewpoint is needed. On a movie set, a cine­
ma­­tographer determines what image is captured by placing the camera
and choosing a lens. For CGI, the viewpoint determines how the three-
dimensional scene is transformed into a two-dimensional rendered image.
     Transformation from three dimensions to two is known as projection. To
better understand projection, consider Figure 4-23, in which an imaginary
pyramid originates from the eye of a viewer looking at a table. A translu-
cent grid lies in the pyramid between the viewer and the scene. Looking
through the grid, the viewer can map each visible location on the three-
dimensional table to a particular square on the two-dimensional grid. That’s
projection, but instead of a grid of squares, it’s a grid of pixels in a bitmap.




Figure 4-23: Projecting a three-dimensional scene onto a flat display is like
viewing a real-world scene through a translucent grid.


Direct Lighting
There are many different methods of projection, but projection methods in
movie-quality rendering are part of the larger issue of lighting. Although
we don’t often realize it, our perception of an object’s color is determined



                        How Software Works                                      Movie CGI   71
                      © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                 not only by the object itself but also by the lighting under which we view the
                 object. Knowing this, filmmakers carefully light their scenes for dramatic
                 effect, but the problem of lighting in CGI is more fundamental. Without an
                 accurate model of scene lighting, the resulting images won’t look realistic
                 at all.
                      To understand why this is true, let’s take a simple scene of a yellow
                 metal table in a green room, as shown in Figure 4-24.



                                                                       Green Walls
                                                                       and Floor




                                                                          Viewpoint


                  Yellow Table


                 Figure 4-24: A 3D scene

                     From this viewpoint, some of the pixels will be “table” pixels and the
                 others will be “wall” or “floor” pixels. A simple renderer might color every
                 table pixel the same shade of yellow, while coloring all the other pixels an
                 identical green. But because this coloring ignores the effect of lighting, the
                 resulting image would be flat and unrealistic. (The blocks of solid color
                 would make the image resemble an animation cel—an interesting effect,
                 but not realistic.) A movie-quality renderer needs a lighting model so that the
                 colors in our scenes are influenced by virtual light sources.
                     The essential real-world lighting effects modeled by CGI renderers
                 include distance, diffuse reflection, and specular reflection.

                 The Distance Effect
                 To understand the distance effect, imagine a lamp emitting pure white light
                 hanging directly over the middle of the table, as in Figure 4-25.
                     The closer this light is to the table, the brighter the table appears. In
                 the physical world, this effect is caused by the beam of light widening as it
                 gets farther from its source. The more narrowly focused a light source is,
                 the less the light diminishes with distance—which explains why the highly
                 focused light of a laser hardly diminishes at all.




72   Chapter 4                           How Software Works
                                       © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
Figure 4-25: The closer a light is to a surface, the brighter
the surface appears.

     Renderers can model the distance effect realistically, but they also allow
unrealistic distance effects in order to create a particular look or mood.
For example, in a scene where a character carries a torch through a cave, a
lighting designer will decide whether the torchlight extends a long way or
barely penetrates the gloom.
     All of the lighting effects we’ll discuss allow these kinds of adjustments.
Although it may seem strange to intentionally create unrealistic light when
the whole point of the lighting model is to make a realistic scene, there’s
a subtle but important distinction between reality and viewers’ expecta-
tions of reality. Using light in unrealistic ways is an old cinematic trick. For
example, when a character in a darkened bedroom turns on a lamp, a stage
light in the ceiling of the set also turns on, so that the entire scene is softly
lit. Without the extra, unrealistic light, the scene won’t look right—it will
appear too dark. In the same way, CGI lighting models allow their controls
to be tweaked to produce results that are a little wrong, but feel right.

The Diffuse Reflection Effect
Light that strikes a surface head-on appears brighter than light that strikes
a surface at a sharp angle. In Figure 4-26, the center of the table seems
brighter, or yellower, than the corners.




                         How Software Works                          Movie CGI   73
                       © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                 Figure 4-26: Diffuse lighting depends on the angle at
                 which light strikes a surface.

                     This is due in part to the distance effect—the center is closer to the
                 lamp than the corners—but is mostly due to the diffuse reflection effect, a
                 change in brightness caused by variation in the light’s angle of incidence. In
                 Figure 4-27, the solid lines show the incident light rays, while the dashed
                 lines are reflections. As you can see, the light strikes point B at a much
                 larger angle than at point A, and therefore point B appears brighter than
                 point A. But note that the viewing angle, or angle of ref lectance, makes no
                 difference in the diffuse reflection effect. Therefore, point A will look the
                 same to both viewers, and so will point B.




                                       A                                       B


                                                        Angles of Incidence




                 Figure 4-27: Diffuse lighting varies based on the angle at which the light strikes
                 the surface, but is the same for all viewpoints.

74   Chapter 4                               How Software Works
                                           © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
The Specular Reflection Effect
Because the metal tabletop is highly reflective, it partially acts as a mir-
ror. As with any mirror, what you see in it depends on what lies on the
opposite angle to your point of view. Figure 4-28 shows a shiny spot on the
table where the hanging light is at the opposite angle from our viewpoint,
approximately midway between the center of the table and the closest edge.
Because this spot is a mirror-like reflection of the white light bulb, the spot
will be white.




Figure 4-28: Specular lighting depends on both the angle
at which the light strikes the surface and the view angle.

    These shiny spots are known as specular reflections, and appear where
the light’s angle of incidence matches the angle of reflectance. Figure 4-29
shows the location of specular reflections for two different viewpoints;
notice that each ray rebounds at the same angle that it struck the table.
Both viewers see a shiny spot on the table, but they see the spot in different
places.
    In the real world, some materials reflect differently than others. A
shiny material like plastic has a high level of specular reflection, while a
dull material like cotton cloth has more diffuse reflection. CGI lighting
models allow artists to set different reflection properties for each surface
on a model to match the appearance of real-world materials.




                        How Software Works                         Movie CGI   75
                      © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                                                      A             B




                 Figure 4-29: The specular light on the table appears in different places for
                 different viewpoints.


                 Global Illumination
                 So far we’ve been discussing direct lighting, the result of light flowing directly
                 from a source to a surface. In reality, the color of every object in the physi-
                 cal world is influenced by the color of every other object nearby. A light-
                 brown sofa in a room with white walls looks very different than it does in a
                 room with blue walls, because the sofa gains a subtle tint from the reflected
                 light of the walls. This is indirect lighting, and for a computer-generated
                 image to look realistic, it must account for this effect. A lighting model that
                 accounts for all of the light in the scene, both direct and indirect, is known
                 as a global illumination model.
                      An example of indirect lighting is shown in Figure 4-30. Let’s assume
                 the light bulb emits pure white light. The beam first hits a wall that is
                 painted cyan (a light blue). The light reflecting from the wall is likewise
                 cyan, and when the reflected cyan light strikes the yellow rug, the resulting
                 reflected light is green. The bouncing colors therefore result in a subtle
                 greenish tint in the yellow rug. This sequence of color changes is caused
                 by subtractive color, where mixing colors results in a darker shade, the way
                 a color inkjet makes different shades by mixing cyan, yellow, and magenta
                 ink. Subtractive color is the opposite of the additive RGB system we dis-
                 cussed early in the chapter, in which mixing results in a brighter color.




76   Chapter 4                            How Software Works
                                        © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
Pure White Spotlight




                                               Cyan Wall




   Yellow Rug


Figure 4-30: Light bouncing off multiple surfaces influences
apparent color.


How Light Is Traced
A global illumination model seems to require following the paths of light
beams as they bounce around the scene. A naive renderer, then, would use
three-dimensional coordinate math to trace the path of every beam of
light from each light source as it bounces from surface to surface. This
would waste a lot effort, though, because it would deduce the color of every
surface in the scene—including surfaces the viewer can’t actually see because
they lie outside of the viewpoint’s field of view, are obscured by other objects,
or are facing away from the viewpoint.

Why Light Is Traced Backward
Renderers avoid this inefficiency by tracing beams backward from the
viewpoint into the scene, a technique known as ray tracing. In ray tracing,
an imaginary line is traced from the viewpoint through the center of each
square in a pixel grid, as shown in Figure 4-31. The geometry of each model
in the scene is compared with the imaginary line to see if the two intersect.
The closest point of intersection to the viewpoint indicates the visible sur-
face that will color the pixel. Note that this method of projection closely
follows the explanation of Figure 4-23.
     Next, more lines are traced outward from this known visible point.
The goal is to discover which lines end at light sources, either directly or
after bouncing off other objects. As shown in Figure 4-31, specular reflec-
tions trace only the rebound at the same angle of each impact, but diffuse
reflections trace a number of lines in random directions. As the diffuse
beams strike other objects, they will spawn more diffuse reflections, which
means the number of paths to trace keeps multiplying the more the pro-
cess continues. Renderers apply a cut-off to limit the number of bounces
for each beam.




                         How Software Works                         Movie CGI   77
                       © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                                                                                         Specular




                                                                                          Diffuse




                 Figure 4-31: Tracing a beam of light from a viewpoint, through the center of the
                 shaded pixel, until it reaches a model in the scene. To determine specular lighting,
                 the tracing rebounds at the same angle as impact; for diffuse lighting, it rebounds
                 at several random angles.


                 How Ray Tracing Models Real-World Effects
                 Although ray tracing is a lot of work for even a network of computers, the
                 method can accurately model many real-world visual effects.
                      One such effect is translucency. Although a bitmap can be made trans-
                 lucent by assigning low alpha values to pixels, that’s not the whole story
                 for transparent materials like glass. A glass tumbler, for example, doesn’t
                 merely allow light to pass through it, but also distorts whatever is behind it,
                 as shown in Figure 4-32.




                 Figure 4-32: The distortion of curved glass




78   Chapter 4                            How Software Works
                                        © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
     A ray tracing renderer can refract light beams according to the laws of
optics as they pass through translucent materials. This will not only allow
the renderer to model glass in CGI, but will also help to reproduce the dis-
torting effects of transparent materials and liquids like water.
     Ray tracing can also be extended to simulate camera lenses. Normally,
all objects in a computer-generated image are perfectly in focus. In images
shot by a movie camera, though, only objects at a certain distance from the
camera are in focus, leaving other objects less focused the farther they are
from that distance. While one might consider having everything in focus
an advantage of computer-generated imagery, skilled cinematographers
use selective focus to help tell their stories. In Figure 4-33, Jimmy Stewart
and Grace Kelly are in focus in the foreground, while the apartments in
the background are blurry; the viewer’s attention is drawn to the actors,
but the distant, open background is a subtle reminder of how visible the
apartments in this courtyard are from each other—an important detail in
the film. Because movie viewers have grown accustomed to receiving depth
information about scenes through the use of focus, computer-generated
images and movies often must simulate the use of photography lenses to
match viewer expectations.




Figure 4-33: Focus depth in Rear Window (Paramount Pictures/Patron Inc., 1954)

    Shadows are another key component of a realistic computer-generated
image. Ray tracing produces shadows naturally, as shown in Figure 4-34.
Because no beam of light can reach the shadowed area, no beam traced
back from the viewpoint can reach the light, so the area will remain dark.




                       How Software Works                                Movie CGI   79
                     © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                 Figure 4-34: Tracing beams of light renders shadows naturally.

                      Ray tracing can also model highly reflective surfaces simply by setting
                 a very high specular reflection property on the material. For example, when
                 you’re standing inside a well-lit room when it’s dark outside, the room in
                 which you stand is clearly reflected in the window.
                      So although ray tracing is computationally intense, adding these real-
                 world effects doesn’t add much extra work, and the effects add greatly to
                 the realism of the final image. In the next chapter, you’ll see the tricks video
                 games use to render reflective surfaces and shadowing in real time, when
                 ray tracing isn’t an option. Some effects, like glass distortion, are usually
                 not even attempted in real-time rendering; there’s simply not enough time.

                 Full-Scene Anti-Aliasing
                 While the images rendered by ray tracing can be stunning, they can suffer
                 from the same aliasing problems we saw with 2D graphics. Whenever one
                 object is in front of another, each projected light beam will either hit the
                 foreground object or miss and hit what lies behind the object. Figure 4-35
                 shows a chair on a rug as seen from a particular viewpoint. Beams traced
                 from this viewpoint near the edge of the chair seat hit either the chair or
                 the rug, which assigns the associated pixel the color of one surface or the
                 other. This causes a jagged edge like those we saw for 2D images.
                      The renderer can avoid the jaggies by applying anti-aliasing to the
                 whole image. There are many methods for full-screen anti-aliasing, but with
                 ray tracing, a direct way to anti-alias the entire scene is to project more
                 beams from the viewpoint than necessary. For example, rather than just
                 sending out a beam at the center of every pixel, the renderer might also
                 send out beams into the spaces between the pixel centers. After the color
                 for every beam is determined, the final color of each pixel is blended from
                 the colors of the center beam and the beams at the neighboring corners.
                 Pixels that lie along an edge in the image are thereby assigned intermediate
                 colors, avoiding the jagged “staircase” effect.




80   Chapter 4                           How Software Works
                                       © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
        Figure 4-35: In the highlighted area, each light beam trace ends on the
        chair or the rug, resulting in jaggies.

            Figure 4-36 demonstrates this idea. Each circle represents a beam pro-
        jected into a scene. The pixels are colored based on the average of colors in
        the center and corners of each pixel, which results in the anti-aliased edge
        shown on the right. More beams can be traced for even better results, at the
        expense of more processing time.




        Figure 4-36: Each pixel’s final color is a blend of
        five beams traced into the scene, one at the center
        of the pixel, and four at the corners.



Combining the Real and the Fake
        In a completely computer-animated film, rendering is the final step in pro-
        ducing each frame, but when CGI is integrated into live-action films, there’s
        more work to be done. Imagine, for example, a scene in which a computer-
        generated Tyrannosaurus rex stalks through a real field of grass.




                                How Software Works                                Movie CGI   81
                              © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
                      To make this happen, we first need two sequences of digital images.
                 One sequence shows the grass field, and has either been shot on a digital
                 camera or on a traditional film camera and then subsequently scanned.
                 Either way, the movements of the camera are computer controlled, which
                 allows the camera movement to match up precisely with the movement of
                 the virtual camera in the other sequence, the computer-generated anima-
                 tion of the dinosaur.
                      Next, the two sequences are combined, frame-by-frame, in a process
                 called digital composition. Although the dinosaur sequence was produced
                 from 3D models, at this point both sequences are simply two-dimensional
                 bitmaps and are combined using the same method used to place our bug-
                 man on top of the sunset back in Figure 4-18. Through the use of alpha
                 blending, the edges of the dinosaur in each frame are smoothly blended
                 with the field-of-grass background. Without this blending, the dinosaur will
                 have a shimmering edge like that of a weatherman standing in front of the
                 five-day forecast.
                      Digital composition is used throughout modern moviemaking, even
                 when no computer-generated imagery is involved, such as for dissolves (a
                 transition where one scene smoothly fades into the next). Formerly, dis-
                 solves were produced by a device known as an optical printer, which pointed
                 a camera at a screen onto which several projectors were aimed. The camera
                 would make a new film that combined the images of the projected films.
                 A dissolve was accomplished by turning down the light in one projector
                 while turning up the light on another. The results were acceptable, but
                 you could always spot an optical printer sequence in a movie because the
                 second-generation images would be blurry compared to the rest of the film.
                 Now, dissolves, superimposed titles, and all sorts of other movie effects
                 that you might not really think of as “effects” are performed with digital
                 composition.


     The Ideal of Movie-Quality Rendering
                 When all the advanced rendering techniques described in this chapter
                 come together, the results can be stunningly realistic, highly stylized, or
                 anything in between. The only real limitation on CGI is time, but that’s a
                 big limitation. The truth is, what I’ve been calling movie-quality rendering
                 can be an unattainable ideal even for Hollywood. Although films can be
                 in production for several years, there’s only so much time that can be allot-
                 ted for each frame. Consider the computer-animated Pixar film WALL-E.
                 With a running time of 98 minutes, the film required the rendering of over
                 140,000 high-resolution computer images. If Pixar wanted to produce all
                 of the images for WALL-E in two years, it would have to render images, on
                 average, every eight minutes.




82   Chapter 4                        How Software Works
                                    © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
     Even on a networked “render farm,” eight minutes is not sufficient
to use ray tracing, global illumination, glass refraction, and all the other
high-end techniques for every single image. Faced with these practical
constraints, filmmakers pick and choose which techniques to use on each
sequence to maximize visual impact. When ideal rendering is required, the
time is spent, but when the best effects won’t be missed or the budget won’t
allow it, they aren’t used. The renderer used at Pixar—a program called
RenderMan that was originally developed at Lucasfilm—can forgo ray trac-
ing and its massive associated computational effort, but that means many of
the realism-enhancing effects have to be produced some other way.
     But how is that done? What kinds of tricks are needed to render images
without ray tracing—images that may not be perfectly realistic but are still
amazing? To answer this question, we’ll turn from Hollywood to the world
of video games, where rendering is under an extreme time limitation. How
extreme? If eight minutes isn’t enough time to produce an ideal render,
imagine trying to render an image in under 20 milliseconds. In the next
chapter, we’ll see how video games produce great graphics in a hurry.




                    How Software Works                          Movie CGI   83
                  © 2015 by V. Anton Spraul
