            We’ll use Scratch’s simple, block-­based programming language to
        code the interactive parts of our game. Scratch uses a system of blocks
        that represent different functions. They snap together like puzzle pieces
        into complete lines of code.




        How Scratch code blocks fit together

            These stacks of code blocks tell the objects in your games what to do.
        As you’ll see shortly, using code blocks in Scratch is very easy.




Getting Started with Scratch
        To begin, you need to sign up for your own Scratch account. It’s free,
        and after you’ve registered, you can start saving and sharing your
        games. In your web browser, open the official Scratch website at
        https://scratch.mit.edu/.
            On the Scratch website, click Join Scratch in the upper right.
        When asked, add your email address and some information about
        yourself. Then you’ll get an email asking you to confirm your email
        address. Check your inbox and click the link in the email. Bam! You
        should now have your own Scratch account.




2   Make Your Own Scratch Games!
The Scratch home page

                 Click the Create button at the top of the Scratch home page if you’re
            not already in Scratch’s editor. You’ll see a blank white box with a smiling
            orange cat, as shown in the following figure. This box is the game window,
            which is the only part of the editor your players will see. The cat is your
            first sprite. Let’s talk about what a sprite is and what you can do with it.




Opening the Scratch editor




                             Chapter 1 Leaf Me Alone!: Scratch Basics               3
            That orange cat is Scratchy, Scratch’s mascot. With every new Scratch
        project, Scratchy is automatically included in a noble effort to encourage
        more people to make games about cats.
            Does Scratchy love lasagna? Does Scratchy hate Mondays? No one
        knows. But we do know that Scratchy is a sprite, which is any object in a
        Scratch game that can do something, like change its appearance or play
        music. Each sprite can have scripts, costumes, and sounds attached to it.
        A script is a group of coding blocks that fit together, telling the sprite what
        to do. A costume is a snapshot or a frame of a sprite that you can use to
        create animation. For example, the pose Scratchy is in right now is one
        of two default costumes that come with Scratchy. Click the Costumes
        tab on the top left (between Code and Sounds) to see the Scratchy sprite’s
        costumes.




        Scratchy comes with two costumes

            When you flip between the two costumes by clicking one and
        then the other like a flip book, Scratchy should look they’re walking.
        We’ll use costumes to animate our sprites or change their appearance.
            Sprites can also have sound effects that they can play. For example,
        Scratchy comes with a meow sound. Click the Play button in the Sounds
        tab to hear it.



4   Make Your Own Scratch Games!
Leaf Me Alone (While I Eat This Leaf)
           We’ll create a simple game in Scratch called Leaf Me Alone (While I Eat
           This Leaf). It’s about a hungry little bug who wants to eat a leaf and
           wants to do so in solitude. You can first play it at https://scratch.mit.edu
           /projects/117199134/, and then we’ll create it.




Exploring the Leaf Me Alone game



                            Chapter 1 Leaf Me Alone!: Scratch Basics                  5
             Click the green flag to start the game. The little bug starts moving
        forward automatically! Press the left or right arrows to make the bug
        change direction. As the bug eats the leaf, it leaves a trail of munches
        behind. This hungry little bug never stops munching. When you want
        to stop the game, click the red stop sign in the upper-­right corner. If you
        click the green flag again, the game will start over.
             It seems pretty simple, right? Now, let’s make this game from scratch!


        Creating Your Own Sprites
        You’ll need to draw your own sprites for the Leaf Me Alone game. One of
        Scratch’s cool features is that you can use the mouse to draw characters
        for your game. Then you can give them instructions to make them do
        different things. It’s okay if they turn out messy or imperfect. Don’t worry!
             Right-­click Scratchy and click Delete. Zoink! Scratchy disappears.
        (You won’t really hear a zoink sound. I made that part up.)
             Next, look at the Sprites list below the game window.




                                                              Opening the
                                                              Sprites list

            The Stage, which is currently a plain white rectangle, is the back-
        ground for the game. When you click it, it should be surrounded by a
        blue highlight. Because we deleted Scratchy, no sprites are in our Stage
        right now. Let’s fix that by adding a new sprite!
            Hover over the cat icon below the Stage to display four more buttons.
        Click Choose a Sprite to select a sprite from the Sprites Library. The
        Paint button lets you create your own sprite. The Surprise button selects
        a random sprite, and the Upload button lets you use an image from
        your computer.




6   Make Your Own Scratch Games!
           Drawing Weird Bugs
           Let’s click the Paintbrush to draw a sprite for our game. Then click the
           Costumes tab. Now you’re in the costume window where you can draw
           a costume for your new sprite.




Drawing a new costume for your bug

               On the left side of the drawing area is a menu of drawing tools.
           Make sure the paintbrush is selected. On the top of the drawing area is
           a color selector. To the right of the paintbrush icon is a number you can
           change to control the size of the paintbrush.
               I drew a caterpillar, but you can draw any kind of bug you’d like.
           You should see a tiny plus sign (+) in the middle of the drawing area.
           That is the center point of the sprite: draw the bug’s head there so its
           head is about the size of the plus sign (+).




                            Chapter 1 Leaf Me Alone!: Scratch Basics              7
            That’s a pretty small bug! To make drawing easier, use the magnifying
        glass buttons in the lower right to zoom in so you can see the bug better.
        The magnifying glass with the plus sign (+) zooms in, and the minus
        sign (–) zooms out. You can see what your sprite looks like at its normal
        size by looking over at the game window.
            You can make your bug look however you want, but make sure it’s
        facing toward the right. Scratch will automatically rotate your bug as it
        walks around the leaf, but sprites should always start by facing toward
        the right. So, if you want to give your bug a big weird butt, make sure its
        butt is pointing to the left side in the opposite direction of the head.
            If you make a mistake while drawing your sprite, click the Undo
        button, which is the left arrow above your drawing. This button will
        undo the last change you made. If you decide you didn’t want to undo
        the change, you can click the Redo button, which is the right arrow
        at the top of your drawing.
            When you’re happy with your bug, look at the Sprites list below the
        Stage again. Your bug should be there now, but it will be called empty.
        That’s not the best name for a bug, but you can change it. Enter your
        new name into the Sprite field just below the stage. Change its name to
        something like weird bug or my perfect creation.


        Drawing a Backdrop
        The Stage is a lot like a sprite in that it also has its own scripts, costumes,
        and sounds. Costumes for the Stage are called backdrops. Any image you
        create for the Stage becomes the backdrop for the entire game window.



8   Make Your Own Scratch Games!
You can make multiple backdrops and switch between them at different
moments in your game. For example, the first level of your game could
take place in a forest, and the second level could take place underwater.
For Leaf Me Alone, we need only one backdrop because there is only one
level. Let’s draw it now.
     Click the Stage (the blank white rectangle) to the right of the Sprites
list. The Stage should show the text 1 backdrop below it. Below that is
a blue button with a stage icon that works just like the Choose a Sprite
button. Hover over it to show four buttons that do the same things as the
Sprite buttons but for backdrops.
      Instead of making a new backdrop, we’ll just paint over the empty
white one we started with. If you’re not in the drawing window, click the
Backdrops tab. Let’s draw the background for the game: a big juicy
leaf for the bug to eat.
      If you zoomed in to draw the bug, you might still be zoomed in.
Click the button in between the two magnifying glasses (=) to go back to
normal view. You should see the entire backdrop. If you can see ­sliders
around the edges to scroll the view, it means you’re still zoomed in.




Drawing the leaf backdrop



                 Chapter 1 Leaf Me Alone!: Scratch Basics                9
           We’ll use two colors for this backdrop: one for the background and
       one for the leaf. (I used sky blue for the background and leaf green for
       the leaf.) Using just two colors here will be important when you write
       your program later, so make sure not to add more colors right now. You
       can also rename the background by clicking the text backdrop1 in the
       text field and entering a new name.
           Now that we have our bug and our leaf, it’s time to get our bug
       moving.


       Using Event Blocks
       Click your bug in the Sprites list, and then make sure you’re in the Code
       tab. The empty area on the right is where we’ll snap our code blocks
       together to write directions for our sprites. On the left are several catego-
       ries that hold the different blocks that we can choose. Click a few of the
       categories to see which code blocks they contain.
            For example, click Events to view the Events blocks, which let you
       sense events and trigger other code blocks:




       Exploring the Events blocks




10   Make Your Own Scratch Games!
     Most categories are pretty self-­explanatory. Motion blocks control
 movement. Looks blocks change the sprite’s appearance. Sound blocks
 play sounds.
     Every stack of programming blocks you’ll write begins with an
Events block. Click Events and you’ll see that all the Events blocks
have big round tops. Like a chef following directions to bake a cake,
 Scratch always reads directions from top to bottom. Keep in mind that
an Events block always goes first; all other blocks can only attach
­underneath it.



                     Events blocks always go
                     first (at the top).

     Events answer the important question When do I do this? The Events
block we want to use right now is when green flag clicked. Click and drag
it into the area on the right.
     Recall that you started the example game by clicking the green flag.
The game had the when green flag clicked event, which tells the program
to run the code blocks when the player clicks the green flag. Our game
will start with this Events block too. Next, we’ll write code that tells our
bug to move.


Moving the Bug
Think of a bug crawling along a wall and the weird, winding path it
takes. That kind of movement is very easy to replicate. The bug can keep
moving forward until the player makes it turn to the left or right. To make
our bug move, we’ll use the blocks Scratch has for moving forward and
turning. The player will have to do their best to guide the bug as it moves
nonstop, making the game fun to play.
     Let’s start by making our bug move forward. The block that moves a
sprite forward moves the sprite only one step forward. Because we don’t
want the bug to stop after just one step, we need to add a loop. A loop
is a block that makes something happen more than once. To make our
bug keep moving, we’ll use a loop block to repeat a move instruction
over and over for as long as the green flag is on.




               Chapter 1 Leaf Me Alone!: Scratch Basics                 11
