Lesson 2
    Introducing
        Apps
       In this lesson, you’ll unlock the true power of your
                computer by learning to use apps!

So What Is an App?.................................................... 258
Did Someone Say Free?............................................. 259
The Microsoft Solitaire Collection App...................... 259
     Playing a Game.................................................... 261
     Closing a Game...................................................264
     Opening Solitaire Again....................................... 266
The Weather App....................................................... 267
     Meeting the Weather App................................... 270
     Checking the Weather in Another City................ 271
The Calendar App...................................................... 273
     Setting Up the Calendar App.............................. 273
     Meeting the Calendar App.................................. 275
     Adding an Event.................................................. 278
     Deleting an Event................................................ 283
More Apps, More Fun................................................ 284
Phew, We Did It! ........................................................ 285
       An app is a tool on your computer that lets you do something specific,
       like play a game, write a letter, manage your emails, or look at photos.
       You’ve already met the Camera app, which we used to take photos in
       the previous lesson. Now we’ll explore some other popular and useful
       apps on your computer.

       First, you’ll learn to use the Solitaire app to play different types of
       solitaire games. You’ll then use the Weather app to check the weather
       forecast and the Calendar app to help you track appointments and
       events. By the end, you should feel confident to explore the other apps
       on your computer at your leisure.


       So What Is an App?
       An app (short for application) is just the name for a tool on your
       computer that helps you do a specific job, like play a game or check
       the weather. You might also have heard it referred to as a program.
       Apps make it easier and faster to do the things you want to do on your
       computer. Your computer already has a lot of great apps on it that you
       can use to do the following:

           QQ Play music

           QQ Play movies

           QQ Manage your photos

           QQ Chat with friends and family

           QQ Keep track of your stocks and bonds

           QQ Monitor your health and fitness

           QQ Keep track of your appointments

           QQ Play games

           QQ Read the latest news



32
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
And much, much more. We’ll cover just a few basic apps in this lesson,
but once you get the hang of those, it will be easy to explore any other
apps that catch your fancy.

Some of the apps we’ll be exploring require you to be connected to the
internet. If you’re not yet connected, flip back to the Introduction to see
more about getting connected.


Did Someone Say Free?
All the apps already on your computer are free to use and enjoy!
However, a few of them may offer you the opportunity to buy items;
for example, the Movies and TV app will let you play your own videos
for free but will offer you the opportunity to buy television shows and
movies. You’ll learn more about these purchases in Lesson 8. Don’t be
concerned, though: you can’t accidentally buy something in an app! If
something has to be paid for, you’ll be given plenty of warning, and you
would need to enter your credit card details to make a payment. In this
lesson, we’re going to focus on learning about the completely free apps,
starting with Solitaire.


The Microsoft Solitaire Collection App
Solitaire is one of the most popular free game apps and can provide
hours of fun. Your Windows 10 computer comes with a range of solitaire
games in the Microsoft Solitaire Collection app. If you’re not a Solitaire
fan, don’t worry: we’ll explore how to add more games in Lesson 8. But
first, to get you used to using apps, let’s explore the Solitaire Collection.

 1    Click the Start button in the bottom-left corner of the screen,
      highlighted here.




                                                                                33
                                                              Did Someone Say Free?
        2    A menu like the one below will appear. Find the tile that says
             Microsoft Solitaire Collection, highlighted here.




        3    If you don’t see this tile in the Start
             menu, use the search feature to find
             it. Click in the search box next to the
             Start button and then type Solitaire.
             Click Microsoft Solitaire Collection
             from the list that appears.




34
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
4    The app will then open on your screen! It should look something
     like this.




Now, let’s play the game!

Pl ay ing a Game
The Microsoft Solitaire Collection includes five different versions of
solitaire to choose from:

    QQ Klondike (also known as Classic Solitaire)

    QQ Spider

    QQ FreeCell

    QQ Pyramid

    QQ TriPeaks




                                                                              35
                                            The Microsoft Solitaire Collection App
       Let’s start by playing everybody’s favorite . . . Klondike!

        1    Click the Klondike button, highlighted here.




        2    A small help screen will appear, offering to tell you how to play.




        3    If you’re not familiar with Klondike, you can read the “How to play”
             guide by clicking the Next button. Once you’ve finished reading
             this guide, click Play the game to jump in! If you know the game
             well, check the Do not show again box and then click Close, and
             you’ll be taken straight to the game.


36
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
Click to reveal more cards.       Stack your cards here.
             Your current score          How long you’ve been playing




                                          Use your mouse to
                                          drag cards between piles.




The aim of Klondike is to stack all the cards in their individual suits, from
Ace to King, in the empty slots at the top right. To move a card to a
stack, move your mouse cursor over a card, click and hold down your
left mouse button, and then move your mouse over the appropriate pile
and release the mouse button. You start a stack by moving an Ace to
any of the empty slots.

You can also move cards between the columns at the bottom to reveal
new cards. You do this in the same way, by holding down your left
mouse button on a card and dragging it to a new pile.

Click once on the deck in the top-left corner to reveal three fresh cards
from the deck. You can move only the top card of these three by clicking
the card and dragging it to a column or stack.




                                                                                       37
                                                     The Microsoft Solitaire Collection App
       Click the double-headed arrow in the top-right corner to make the game
       take up the entire screen. When the game takes up the entire screen,
       you can click the button again to make it smaller.

       If you get stuck and want to start a new game, click the New Game
       button in the bottom-left corner to start again with a fresh deck of cards.

       Closing a Game
       You can close Microsoft Solitaire Collection in the same way you closed
       the Camera app in Lesson 1. Click the X in the top-right corner, as
       shown here. This will take you back to the Desktop.




       If you close this app after starting but not completing a game, your
       session will be automatically saved. That way, when you open the app
       again, the game will pick up at the same place as your last session. This
       allows you to finish the game the next time you open the app!

       If you’d like to try a different version of solitaire, simply click the Back
       button and choose a different game.




38
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
        A Few Solitaire Tips
Now that you’ve given Solitaire a go, here are a couple tips to
make the game more enjoyable:

   QQ By default, the top-left deck gives you three cards at a
      time but lets you move only the top card. You can make
      the game easier by making this deck give you one card
      at a time rather than three. To change this setting, click
      Menu, click Game options, and then select Draw 1.
      To exit the menu, click the Menu button again.




   QQ If you’re stuck, the app can give you a hint by
      highlighting a card and a place you can move it to. To
      get a hint, click the Menu button and then click Hint.
      A card (or two) will flash, suggesting a move you can
      make. If you don’t like that move, you can get another
      suggestion by clicking Hint again. You’ll also see a hint
      if you wait for a few seconds without clicking a card. To
      exit the menu, click the Menu button again.




                                                                         39
                                       The Microsoft Solitaire Collection App
       Opening Solitaire Again
       The first time you open Microsoft Solitaire Collection, you’ll be able to
       play the game right away. When you open the app for a second time,
       however, you might be asked to create an Xbox profile, as shown next.
       This lets you track your scores and share your progress in your games.




       If this appeals to you, click Next and follow the prompts. However, if
       you’re like me and just want to play the game, I suggest clicking Not
       now. The Solitaire app will ask you if you’re really sure about this, so
       check the box that says Don’t show this again and click Play as a
       Guest.




40
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
Now you can choose your favorite type of solitaire just as before and
begin playing.




                        Activity #1
    In this activity, you’ll try another game in the Microsoft Solitaire
    Collection!

    1.   Open Microsoft Solitaire Collection using the Start menu.

    2.   Click the Spider button.

    3.   Read the guide if you’re not sure how to play.

    4.   Play through a complete game of Spider solitaire.

    5.   Close the Solitaire app.




The Weather App
Now let’s have a look at the Weather app. The Weather app tells you the
current weather for any location you choose. It also shows you a forecast
for the next few days so that you can plan accordingly. Let’s start by
opening the Weather app:

1    Click the Start button in the bottom-left corner of the screen.

2    The Start menu will open, and you should see a tile with a white
     sun that’s labeled Weather. Click this tile to open to the Weather
     app.




                                                                               41
                                                                    The Weather App
        3    If you don’t see the Weather app
             in the Start menu, use the search
             feature. Click in the search box
             next to the Start button and type
             Weather. Click Weather from the
             list that appears.




42
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
4   If this is the first time you’ve opened the Weather app, you’ll see a
    screen like this.




5   Click either Fahrenheit or Celsius, whichever is your preference.

6   The Weather app will also ask you to set your default city. When
    you open the Weather app in the future, it will automatically give
    you the weather for your default city, so it’s often best to use your
    own location for this. You can do this by either letting Windows
    detect your location or selecting a location yourself.

7   To let Windows detect your location, click Detect my location.
    You’ll then be asked to give the Weather app permission to access
    your location. Click Yes.




                                                                            43
                                                                 The Weather App
        8    If you prefer not to let the app access your location information,
             you can instead click in the Search box below the “Detect my
             location” button and type the name of your city.

        9    Now click Start to save this information and open the Weather
             app.


       Meeting the We ather App
       Now that you’re all set up, opening the Weather app will show you the
       weather forecast for your current city, set out like the following figure.

               Current weather in your default city




                                  Hourly breakdown for today
       Today’s weather with highs and lows                 Forecast for the next seven days




44
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
The Weather app will tell you the current temperature along with some
key facts, such as the wind speed and humidity, situated above the
forecast for the next few days. Below this, you’ll see a breakdown of the
hourly temperature for the rest of the day, with a line showing how the
temperature will change. You can even scroll down further to see more
details, such as when the sun will rise and set!

Check ing the We ather in Another Cit y
You can also use check the weather in other cities. To do so, follow these
steps:

1    Click in the box in the top-right corner labeled Search.




2    Type the name of the city you want to look up.

3    A list of matching cities will appear below, like in the following
     figure; click the one you want to use.




4    You should now see the weather for that city.




                                                                              45
                                                                   The Weather App
        5    To go back to your default city, click the Back button in the top-
             left corner of the screen.




        6    You should now see the weather for your default city once again.




                                Activity #2
            In this activity, you will practice checking the weather for a
            particular city.

            1.   Check the weather forecast in Los Angeles, California. Find
                 out what tomorrow’s maximum temperature will be.

            2.   Once you’ve finished checking the weather, close the
                 Weather app using the X in the top-right corner.




46
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
The Calendar App
Another handy app on your computer is the Calendar app. The
Calendar app helps you keep track of appointments, birthdays,
vacations, and other important events, just like having a daily planner on
your computer. Better still, the Calendar app can remind you that your
event or appointment is about to start with a small notification. Now
that’s an assistant worth having!

Set ting Up the C alendar App
To open the Calendar App, follow these steps

1    Click the Start button in the bottom-left corner of the screen.

2    The Start menu will open, and you should see the Calendar app
     tile. It might show the word “Calendar” or the current date. Click
     the Calendar tile.




                                                                             47
                                                                 The Calendar App
        3    If you don’t see the Calendar app in the Start menu, use the
             search feature. Click in the search box next to the Start button and
             type Calendar. Click Calendar from the list that appears.




        4    Click Get started.




48
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
5    If this is the first time you’ve used the Calendar app, you’ll be
     prompted to add an account or use your existing account. The
     Calendar app needs to know your account so it knows whom
     to attribute events and appointments to. You’ll use the same
     Microsoft account you set up in the Introduction, and this account
     should already appear at the top of the Accounts list, like mine
     does in the following figure. Since you don’t need to add a new
     account, just click Ready to go.




6    This will open your personal calendar!


Meeting the C alendar App
Now that the Calendar app is set up, it’s time to start organizing your
days. Let’s take a look at the main Calendar screen.

Today’s date will be shaded in blue. To the left side you’ll see a “mini”
calendar that gives you a bird’s-eye view of the month. You can use this
to peek at future or past months while still keeping your main calendar
on today.




                                                                             49
                                                                 The Calendar App
       Bird’s-eye view calendar   The month you’re looking at
                     Main calendar                              Today’s date




       Your calendar isn’t just restricted to the current month; you can move
       back and forth through the months to see future and past appointments
       and events. To move through the calendar, follow these steps:

        1    Click the up arrow to go back a month and the down arrow to go
             forward a month.




50
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
2    To get quickly back to the current date, click the Today button.




3    You can also scroll through the bird’s-eye view calendar by using
     the highlighted arrows.




Once you’re comfortable moving through the calendar to different
dates, move on to adding events.

Adding an Event
The Calendar app is an excellent place to store information about
important events and appointments you want to keep track of. You’ll
be able to easily view all of your upcoming events, add new events,
and even receive reminders before an event starts. That beats a wall
calendar! Here’s how to add an event:

1    Click the New event button,
     highlighted here.




                                                                           51
                                                               The Calendar App
        2    The Calendar app will open a form that asks for some information
             about the event, with boxes for the event name, location, start and
             end times, and any extra details. You don’t have to fill out all this
             information, but it is a good idea to have at least an event name
             and a start date and time.




                                                                  Event name
                                                                  Location
                                                                  Start date and time
                                                                  End date and time


                                                                  Event description




            QQ Event Name: Click in the box that contains the words
               “Event name” (these words will disappear once you begin
               to type). Type a name for the event (for example, “Doctor’s
               Appointment”). Make it something short but recognizable,
               because this will appear in the little box for the day in your
               main calendar!

            QQ Location: You can store the location of the event so it can
               remind you where you need to be: click in the Location box
               and type in the event’s location. This could be a full address or
               simply a helpful reminder such as “Mary’s House.”


52
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
QQ Start Date and Time: Select the date of the event or, if your
   event is longer than one day, the date the event starts on.
   You can type in the date or, to make this easier, you can click
   the small calendar symbol next to the date (highlighted in the
   following figure) to choose from a list. Remember to click the up
   or down arrow to cycle through the months. Choose a start time
   for the event by clicking the down arrow next to the time and
   choosing from the list of times. You might need to scroll down
   a little to select the appropriate time. If your event starts at a
   specific time that isn’t shown, you can type it in, but make sure
   to type in whether it’s am or pm. Otherwise, it might appear at
   the wrong time! You can also check the All day box if you would
   like the event to take up the entire day.




QQ End Date and Time: Choose the date and time your event
   finishes. If your event is only one day long or less, just choose
   the same date as the start date. If you don’t choose an end date
   or time, the calendar will automatically make the event half an
   hour long from the start date and time.



                                                                        53
                                                           The Calendar App
            QQ Event Description: If there are any more details you want to
               add, you can type them in here. This could include a phone
               number to call if you can’t make the event, or some notes so
               that you can remember what to bring to the event (for example,
               if the event is a barbeque and you’ve agreed to bring coleslaw,
               you might put “Bring coleslaw” here).

       Adding a Reminder
       The Calendar app can remind you of an event by popping up a small
       box in the corner on your computer screen just before your event begins
       and giving you a summary of the event details. This box will appear
       regardless of whether or not you have the Calendar app open at that
       particular time. This way, you won’t forget appointments during your
       busy day.

       Here’s how to add a reminder:

        1    Click in the Reminder box. Depending on the size of your screen,
             the reminder box might look a little different.

             QQ If you have a big screen, you can see it quite clearly, as shown
                here.




             QQ If your screen is a little smaller, the box will appear without the
                word “Reminder,” as you can see here.




54
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
      QQ And if your screen is even smaller, you’ll need to click the
         Options button (highlighted here) to set the reminder.




2     Choose when you want to be reminded about the event. For
      example, a 30-minute reminder will let you know 30 minutes in
      advance of the start time of the event. If it’s something you have to
      prepare for, or somewhere you need to travel to, you might want
      to set a longer reminder time. If it’s something you can do right
      away, like making a phone call or feeding the dog, you can set a
      shorter reminder time.

    QQNote: When the time for your
      appointment has come and the
      reminder box pops up, you’ll be
      able to click the Dismiss button to
      close the reminder. Alternatively, you
      can use the Snooze button to be
      reminded about the event again in
      a few minutes time.

Saving Your Event
After you’ve set your event details, it’s time to save the event. Simply
click the Save and close button above the event to save your details
and your reminder.




                                                                              55
                                                                  The Calendar App
       You’ll now be returned to the main calendar screen. Your event should
       appear in a shaded blue strip on the appropriate date, like in the following
       figure. This shaded strip will only show a snippet of the information, so to
       see the full details of any event, just click it once with your mouse.




            QQTip: You can also create an event by clicking the date box that your
              event occurs on in the calendar; this will bring up a mini version of
              the New Event form, like the shown next. Either add a few details
              here or click More details to bring up the full form.




       Deleting an Event
       If an event has been canceled, you can remove it from your calendar.
       Here’s how to delete an event:

        1     Find the event in your calendar and right-click the colored strip.




56
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
2    Click the Delete button, shown next.




3    The event will now disappear from your calendar.

Now you can use the Calendar app to organize your life!




                       Activity #3
    Let’s practice adding events to your calendar:

    1.   Add your birthday, the birthdays of your closest friends
         and family members, and any other special dates to the
         calendar. Experiment with using the Repeat button before
         saving the event. This button adds the same event for all
         future years in your calendar, so that you’ll never forget an
         important birthday!

    2.   Add any important events coming up in the next week to
         your calendar and make sure to set reminders.

    3.   Close the calendar using the X in the top-right corner.




                                                                               57
                                                                   The Calendar App
       More Apps, More Fun
       We’ve looked at a few of the most popular apps, but many more come
       with your computer. Therefore, your next challenge is to go exploring!
       You can see the full list of the apps on your computer by clicking the
       Start button and then clicking All apps. Here are a few to check out to
       get started:

           QQ News: Keep up to date with the latest news in your region.

           QQ People: This is a digital address book to help you keep track of
              people you know and their contact details.

           QQ Sports: Find out the latest sports news and scores.

           QQ Voice Recorder: Record yourself talking using your microphone.
              This app is great for taking quick notes or recording messages
              to send to someone.

       But don’t be afraid to try out any of the other apps you find there.
       As mentioned at the beginning of this lesson, you won’t be able to
       accidentally spend any money, so there’s no risk. Do keep in mind,
       though, that some apps (such as News and Sports) require you to be
       connected to the internet to work properly.


       Phew, We Did It!
       In this lesson, we looked at using some of the free, built-in apps that come
       with your computer. We examined the Microsoft Solitaire Collection,
       Weather, and Calendar apps, and you learned to do the following:

           QQ Play card games using the Microsoft Solitaire Collection.

           QQ Check the weather using the Weather app.

           QQ Add events to your calendar.

       Great work! In the next lesson you’ll start looking at putting photos on
       your computer!
58
Lesson 2: Introducing Apps
                Final Activity
Congratulations, you’ve completed Lesson 2. The following
activities will help you review your learning. If you can complete
all these activities with confidence, then you are ready for
Lesson 3. If not, don’t lose heart—just keep practicing by trying
out different apps!

1.   Open Microsoft Solitaire Collection and win a game of
     FreeCell.

2.   Open the Weather app and check tomorrow’s maximum
     temperature in your hometown.

3.   Open the Calendar and add an event titled “Complete
     Lesson 3” for some time during the next week. Be sure to
     allocate at least two hours!

4.   Try out a few new apps: open the Calculator app and
     explore the buttons. This is really simple to use and useful
     for all sorts of things.

5.   Open the News app and see what you can do. Find news
     local to you and news on things you’re interested in.

6.   Explore the apps in the Start menu and try out any apps
     you like the look of.




                                                                          59
                                                               Phew, We Did It!
