                 TUTORIAL:
                           19
         DESIGNING A BUSINESS CARD




Even in this supposedly “electronic” age, business cards
(or visiting cards, or address cards—if you don’t want to
sound too business-like) remain popular. This little piece
of cardboard is a reﬂection of your—or your organization’s—personality, a little
presentation of what you consider most important about you. So, not surprisingly,
the design aspect of this small item of stationery is very important. Like in a
three-line haiku, you have a very limited space to make a clear, original, and
memorable statement.
     For the same reasons—simplicity, limited space, and the need for the
design to stand out—a business card is a perfect test project for such an essen-
tial designer’s tool as a vector editor. Inkscape’s toolset makes it a great tool for
the job; its only real weakness is the relative difﬁculty of creating print-ready
output ﬁles with device colors.
     The steps of this tutorial show two quite different sample designs, but I’m
not inviting you to follow them exactly (unless you just want to learn the tech-
niques). If you plan to design a real business card, try to ﬁnd and analyze a lot
more examples than these two, and play with Inkscape to come up with something
that combines the best features you’ve seen with something completely original.




                    The Book of Inkscape
                 (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov
                    Creativity cannot be taught, but it can be inspired. My examples are both
                    somewhat on the artsy side; perhaps what you have in mind for your own card
                    would be more traditional—but the general approach would be the same.


      19.1         Design 1: Template and Text
                    The ﬁrst step is straightforward. Create a new document by choosing the template
                    called business_card_90x50mm from the File4New submenu. (If you need a
                    different size, you can always change it in Document Properties, Shift-Ctrl-D .) Then
                    switch to the Text tool and create text objects for all the text lines you will display
                    on your card—name, position, address, phone, etc. Make them all independent
                    objects (click and type each one separately) because you’re going to move them
                    around a lot, trying different layouts. If you will display a logo on your card,
                    import the logo ﬁle (Appendix B) and, if you only have it in bitmap format, trace
                    it (18.8) to convert it to paths.




                    Figure 19-1: Preparing the workspace and adding text objects

                         The next step is choosing font(s) for your text objects. A font you like will
                    go a long way towards a design you like, too. If you’re serious about design, you
                    likely have a large library of your favorite fonts; otherwise, a few basic (but good)
                    fonts usually come with your operating system. Many high-quality and free (or
                    inexpensive) fonts can be found on the Web.
                         I have long liked the free font called Gentium;1 its main feature is good
                    Unicode support, but I also ﬁnd it aesthetically pleasing, so I decided to use it
                    for this design. After you assign the font to all the text strings, play with their
                    relative sizes by resizing them in Selector (Figure 19-2). Do the different sizes of
                    the same font look good together? Strangely, that is not a given—and if
                    not, you will need to use different fonts for different elements. In any case,
                    however, never use more than two fonts in such a small design—it will likely look
                    too motley.
                         To make Inkscape see a new font, just install it as you usually do in your
                    operating system and restart Inkscape. The new font will be listed in the Text
                    and Font dialog as well as in the Text tool’s drop-down list (15.4.2). Supported
                    font formats include TrueType, Type 1, and OpenType.




                    1   Available at http://sil.org/~gaultney/gentium

                                               The Book of Inkscape
322   Chapter 19
                                            (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov
        Figure 19-2: Fonts and sizes


19.2   Design 1: Layout
        Designing a business card for a single person (as opposed to creating a template
        to be used by many cards with different names) has an important advantage:
        You can position and align your text objects precisely, without having to leave
        extra space for variable-length names and addresses. In this case, I was able to
        push all the address bits closely against the name, creating an asymmetric com-
        position tightly bound together by its alignments (the address is aligned with
        the start of the last name, the email with the top of the name, etc.).




        Figure 19-3: Laying out the text

             This already looks interesting—but perhaps a little too rectangular. An
        obvious thing to try is to select all ( Ctrl-A ) and rotate a bit (press [ once).
        Much better! The design now has a ﬂair of constructivism—a short-lived but
        inﬂuentional movement of the 1920s whose proponents loved bold contrasts
        and running texts at an angle (though they probably would not have approved
        of the Gentium font). Let’s develop this style; add three black corners intruding
        into the composition from the edges and place a big red circle in the mass center
        of the composition, as shown in Figure 19-4. (Constructivists loved simple geo-
        metric forms in black and red!)
             To look their best, most text objects require adjusting of letter spacing
        (uniform spacing between all letters in the text) and kerning (intervals between
        some particular letter pairs). In the Text tool, use Alt-< , Alt-> to change letter
        spacing and Alt -arrows to change kerning at the text cursor (15.3.3). Generally,
        large text objects look better with tighter letter spacing, while small type needs
        increased letter spacing for readability.



                               The Book of Inkscape
                            (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov          Designing a Business Card   323
                    Figure 19-4: Rotating and adding shapes


      19.3         Design 2: Graphic
                    Our ﬁrst business card attempt was mostly inspired by a layout of the text lines,
                    with graphic elements coming secondary to support and reinforce that layout.
                    Could we go the other way around, starting from some piece of graphic and
                    building the design around it?
                         Of course, if you’re doing a company business card, the obvious starting
                    point is the company’s logo. If you’re designing a card just for yourself and want
                    it to be more personal, you can try tracing (18.8) an imported photo of yours.
                    Finally, you can also use a piece of clipart, for example from http://openclipart.org
                    (1.3), which has many decorations and abstract pieces that might become the
                    centerpiece of your card.
                         For my second demo card, however, I chose another approach: artistic initials.
                    I switched to the Calligraphic pen, set the Angle to 90 degrees with a Fixation
                    of 100 and drew a couple of intertwined letters. After I ﬁnally got the lettershapes
                    more or less right, the result was mildly interesting but far from exciting. I then
                    tried to improve it by creating a union of the path objects and then simplifying,
                    insetting, and outsetting it a few times:




                    Figure 19-5: Creating initials

                         Now the letters look more natural—but they can still be made much more
                    interesting. The general rule of modern design seems to be: Don’t be too neat!
                    If you can dirty, distort, or damage your art in a creative way, go ahead and do
                    it. So I selected a somewhat narrower pen nib, maximized Tremor to 100 and
                    danced wildly around the letters with my tablet pen (though this could just as



                                           The Book of Inkscape
324   Chapter 19
                                        (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov
        well be done with a mouse). At ﬁrst the result may appear rather unattractive,
        but this is because I forgot to do the usual Simplify/Inset/Outset magic to it:




        Figure 19-6: Damaging the lettershapes creatively


19.4   Design 2: Layout
        Naturally, such a piece of distortion art deserves the central place on the card,
        with the rest of the stuff being placed symmetrically around it. I used a plain,
        slanted, very light sans serif font (Helvetica Condensed Light) which does not
        distract from the artwork in the center. The horizontal layout may not be the
        best here—the card seems to be cramped. Rotating everything on its side (press
        Ctrl-[ ) gives ample space to the art and allows the text to ﬂoat to the edges so it
        does not interfere:




        Figure 19-7: Laying out the card around the initials


19.5   Design 2: Texture and Color
        Something is starting to emerge here, but it’s far from being ready. The card
        looks too empty, too ﬂat, too hostile to the irregular blotch of ink in its center.
        Can we do something about it? Let’s try adding some background gradients. As
        explained in 10.7, the default gradient from opacity 1 to opacity 0 of some color
        (for example, blue) looks crude and unnatural, its boundary clearly visible even
        if it uses a very pale color. To improve the look of a gradient over a white back-
        ground, paint the transparent end of the gradient white, instead of the same
        color as the other end.




                               The Book of Inkscape
                            (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov           Designing a Business Card   325
                         Here, I added four rectangles with irregularly slanted bluish green gradients
                    at the edges of the card to achieve a naturally curly, softly blended, asymmetric
                    look. The dashed lines are the bounding boxes of the four rectangles with gra-
                    dients, and the gradient lines show the span and direction of each gradient. I
                    painted the initials dark blue and added a blurred, 50% opaque drop shadow
                    to the letters (Filters4Shadows and Glows4Drop Shadow).




                    Figure 19-8: Adding gradients and shadows

                        Can it be still improved? A good way to add texture to the card is by overlay-
                    ing a regular grid of semitransparent lines. Draw a rectangle over the entire card,
                    open Fill and Stroke ( Shift-Ctrl-F ), switch the ﬁll to pattern, and choose the Stripes
                    1:1 white stock pattern. Now, using pattern adjustment handles in the Node tool
                    (10.8.1), rotate the strips and scale them down according to taste. Finally, move
                    the rectangle over the gradients and the initials but below the text in z-order,
                    and reduce its opacity to 20%.




                    Figure 19-9: Adding striped texture: The card is ready.


      19.6         Export and Printing
                    We now have two decent business card designs—but how do we actually get them
                    printed? The best course of action depends on the nature of the design, and
                    you must understand the current limitations of Inkscape and the capabilities of
                    various output formats (Appendix B) to identify the best approach.




                                           The Book of Inkscape
326   Chapter 19
                                        (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov
19.6.1 PostScript
The ﬁrst (“constructivist”) design does not have any transparency or gradients;
it is a collection of fully opaque shapes. This means it can be saved without any
quality loss as PostScript or EPS, which most print service providers will accept.
To be on the safe side, preview your PS or EPS output ﬁle using Ghostscript.2
Or, you can directly print such a ﬁle to your local printer device by the File4Print
command, which sends the PostScript rendition of the document to the printer.

19.6.2 PDF
For more complex designs, the best output format is PDF (B.3). These days,
nearly all print service providers accept PDF, often in preference to PostScript.
PDF is a more powerful format by itself and it is better supported by Inkscape;
with it, you don’t have to worry about gradients or opacity. Filtered objects—such
as the initials with a drop shadow in our second design—will be automatically
rasterized on export to PDF if you enable this option in the PDF export options
dialog.
     Generally, the safest strategy for preparing your design for print is to separate
the necessarily vector elements from those that can be rendered into a bitmap.
For example, text (especially using small-size fonts), logos, and crisp foreground
shapes must remain vector; avoid using ﬁlters on them, but separate them into
a foreground layer and convert all texts to paths so they do not depend on the
availability of the fonts. Anything else (background shapes with or without
transparency, ﬁltered objects, imported bitmaps, etc.) can be collectively pre-
rendered into a single bitmap with Make a Bitmap Copy: Set the desired resolu-
tion in Inkscape Preferences (Bitmaps page), select all the objects to rasterize,
and press Alt-B , after which you can delete or hide the vector originals. Thus, an
“export-hardened” ﬁle—with best chances of being exported to PDF, imported
into other programs, or printed without loss—would typically have just two layers:
one with bitmap-like artwork rendered as one large bitmap and the other with
vector-like artwork all in paths.

19.6.3 Bitmap Output
As a last resort, if even PDF doesn’t cut it, you can always just export the entire
design as a bitmap. Inkscape can only export as PNG, but any number of other
programs, from expensive Photoshop to the free GIMP or command-line
ImageMagick, will convert a PNG to another bitmap format, such as the old (but
still popular in the print world) TIFF.




2   http://ghostscript.com

                            The Book of Inkscape
                         (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov       Designing a Business Card   327
                   19.6.4 Using Device Colors
                   Often, however, what you need to send to the print service provider is not just
                   PDF or TIFF that faithfully reproduces the way your design looks on screen.
                   Instead, you need your output to use device-speciﬁc CMYK or spot colors. While
                   there’s some limited support for using color-managed display, you can’t export
                   anything except the sRGB screen color space into any output format. Until this
                   area is improved, you will need to use some other software to rectify this.
                        I have successfully imported Inkscape-produced SVG or PDF ﬁles into Adobe
                   Illustrator in order to set a spot color for some objects, after which I resaved
                   the ﬁle as PDF. With bitmap output, it is possible to create a device-speciﬁc CMYK
                   ﬁle using only open source tools; ﬁrst, convert the PNG exported from Inkscape
                   to regular RGB TIFF, and then use the tifﬁcc command-line utility from the
                   LittleCMS library3 to convert it to CMYK. You will need the ICC proﬁle ﬁle of
                   your target output device for this conversion.

                   19.6.5 Tiled Output
                   If you print your cards on an ofﬁce or home printer, most likely you will use the
                   A4 or Letter paper format instead of the business card format. In that case it
                   makes sense to print multiple copies per sheet and then cut it into separate
                   cards. To prepare a printable ﬁle, group all objects of your card, then use the
                   Create Tiled Clones dialog to create a 2×5 grid of clones of the group that will
                   exactly ﬁt on your printable page.




                   Figure 19-10: Tiling the card to ﬁll the output page




                   3   http://littlecms.com

                                                 The Book of Inkscape
328   Chapter 19
                                              (C) 2009 by Dmitry Kirsanov
