                Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne




        Installing Pygame
           for Python 3
         on Mac and Linux




In this supplement, you’ll find instructions for install-
ing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac (page 2) and Linux
(page 10). These installations can be tricky, so if
you need help, ask your IT professional or another
knowledgeable person. Simpler instructions for using
Pygame with Python 2 can be found in Appendix B of
Teach Your Kids to Code.
                             Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne



Pygame for Python 3.4 on Mac
                The following steps can be very tricky. Do not try them alone.
                Instead, give these instructions to the Python programmer or IT
                professional who is helping you.

                Prepare for Terminal Commands
                1.   Install Xcode. In Finder, go to Applications4App Store.
                     Search for Xcode and click Get to install the Xcode developer
                     tools, as shown in Figure 1. You’ll need these tools to run some
                     installation commands.




                     Figure 1: Install Xcode from the App Store.

2  Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux
         Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


2. Install XQuartz. Go to http://xquartz.macosforge.org/ and
   download the current version of XQuartz (2.7.7 as of this
   writing), as shown in Figure 2. Open your Downloads folder,
   double-click the XQuartz-2.7.7.dmg file, and then double-click
   the XQuartz.pkg package file and follow the instructions to
   complete the installation.




    Figure 2: Install XQuartz.


                               Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux   3
                            Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


                3. Open a Terminal (command line) window. To do this, go to
                   Applications4Utilities, and double-click Terminal, as shown
                   in Figure 3. Your Terminal window will open.




                     Figure 3: Open a Terminal window.

                   Next, you’ll enter commands in the Terminal to install pro-
                grams that help install Pygame.




4  Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux
         Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


Enter Terminal Commands
In the next few steps, you’ll enter a total of 10 commands in the
Terminal. Enter each command one at a time exactly as shown,
and then press the return key. Some commands may take a
while and produce lots of output.
1.   Install Homebrew. Homebrew is a free program that helps you
     install Python, Pygame, and other programs on a Mac. At the
     Terminal prompt, type the following as a single line and then
     press return:

     ruby -e "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/
     install/master/install)"

         (You may want to make your Terminal window wider to
     allow the line to fit, but it’s okay if it wraps around.)
2. Prepare Homebrew for use. At the Terminal prompt, enter
   each of the following three commands exactly as shown. The
   second two may take a few moments to run and will show sev-
   eral screens of information.

     echo export PATH='/usr/local/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bash_profile
     brew update
     brew doctor

3. Install Python 3 for Pygame. At the Terminal prompt, enter:

     brew install python3

         This will install a separate Python 3 specifically for
     Pygame use—this step is required for all of the following
     steps to work.
4. Install Mercurial. Mercurial is a free source control manage-
   ment system that this Pygame installation requires on a Mac.
   At the Terminal prompt, enter:

     brew install mercurial




                               Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux   5
                            Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


                5. Install Pygame dependencies. Pygame requires several
                   helper programs, called dependencies, so that it can display
                   animations, play sounds, and create game graphics. Type
                   the following three lines at the Terminal command prompt,
                   pressing return after each line:

                     brew install sdl sdl_image sdl_mixer sdl_ttf portmidi
                     brew tap homebrew/headonly
                     brew install --HEAD smpeg

                         Each command will take a few moments to run and display
                     screens full of information. Keep going; you’re almost done.
                6. Install Pygame. Type the following line at the Terminal
                   prompt and press return:

                     sudo pip3 install hg+http://bitbucket.org/pygame/pygame

                7.   You may have to enter an administrator password (use your
                     password, or ask an IT administrator), and the installation
                     may take a few minutes.


                Create a Desktop Shortcut
                Pygame and the new Python 3 that you just installed create a sepa-
                rate IDLE editor that you’ll use especially for Pygame-enabled apps.
                (You can use this new version of IDLE for any program in the book,
                but you must use it when writing and running Pygame apps.)
                1.   Go to Finder4Go4Go to Folder . . . , as shown in Figure 4.




                     Figure 4: Choose Go to Folder… from the Go menu.

6  Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux
         Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


2. In the Go to the folder: window prompt, type /usr/local/Cellar/
   python3 and click Go, as shown in Figure 5.




    Figure 5: Type /usr/local/Cellar/python3 and click Go.

3. Double-click the python3 folder to open the folder inside, as
   shown in Figure 6.




    Figure 6: Double-click python3 and then open the
    folder inside.

4. In this folder, you will find the IDLE 3 application. Hold down
   the control key and click the IDLE 3 icon. From the pop-up
   menu that opens, select Make Alias, as shown in Figure 7.




                               Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux   7
                            Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne




                     Figure 7: Select Make Alias from the pop-up menu.

                5. A new alias, or shortcut icon, will appear, with a name like
                   IDLE 3 alias, as shown in Figure 8.




                     Figure 8: A new alias appears.

                6. Click the filename to edit it, and rename the new alias pygame
                   IDLE or something similar, as shown in Figure 9, to help you
                   remember that this IDLE has Pygame installed.




                     Figure 9: Rename the new alias pygame IDLE.

8  Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux
         Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


7.   Drag the Pygame IDLE shortcut icon to your desktop, as
     shown in Figure 10. This will allow you to access the correct
     IDLE for Pygame programming right from your desktop.




     Figure 10: Drag the Pygame IDLE
     icon to your desktop.

8. Double-click the Pygame IDLE icon. The Pygame-enabled
   IDLE editor window will open. Type import pygame and press
   return, as shown in Figure 11. IDLE should respond with a
   >>> prompt and no errors.




     Figure 11: Import Pygame. IDLE should respond with a >>> prompt and
     no errors.

    Now you’re ready to program the Pygame apps from Chapters 8
through 10 on your Mac. Happy coding!




                              Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux   9
                            Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


Pygame for Python 3 on Linux
                The following steps can be a bit tricky. Give these instructions to
                the Python programmer or IT professional who is helping you.
                    First, follow the directions in the section “Python for Linux”
                (Appendix A, page 276) to install IDLE and Python 3.4 or later.
                Then, follow the instructions below to install Pygame for Python 3
                on your Linux system.
                1.   Run System Tools4Terminal (or XTerm or a similar appli-
                     cation for your version of Linux).
                2. Install Pygame’s dependencies. In the Terminal window, type
                   (or copy/paste) the following four lines exactly as shown and
                   press enter, as shown in Figure 12.

                     sudo apt-get install mercurial python3-dev python3-numpy ffmpeg \
                     libsdl-image1.2-dev libsdl-mixer1.2-dev libsdl-ttf2.0-dev
                     libsmpeg-dev \
                     libsdl1.2-dev libportmidi-dev libswscale-dev libavformat-dev
                     libavcodec-dev \
                     python-numpy subversion




                     Figure 12: Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Linux requires some com-
                     mand line terminal skills.

                3. Download and install Pygame. When the dependencies finish
                   installing, enter the following five lines one at a time at the
                   Terminal prompt:

                     cd /usr/local/lib/python3.4/dist-packages/
                     sudo svn co svn://seul.org/svn/pygame/trunk pygame
                     cd pygame
                     sudo python3 setup.py build
                     sudo python3 setup.py install




10  Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux
        Teach Your Kids to Code © 2015 by Bryson Payne


4. When the Pygame installation completes, open a file window
   and go to Applications4 Programming4IDLE (using
   Python-3.4) to open the IDLE Python shell.
5. Test your installation of Pygame for Python 3 on Linux by
   typing import pygame and pressing enter at the >>> prompt, as
   shown in Figure 13. Python should reply with >>> to let you
   know that Pygame was successfully imported.




   Figure 13: Testing Pygame on Python 3 using IDLE—now you’re ready to
   code Pygame apps on Linux!

    You’re ready to use the Pygame programs from Chapters 8
through 10 on your Linux machine. Happy coding!




                             Installing Pygame for Python 3 on Mac and Linux   11
