tcpip46_02.fm Page 727 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                                   TRANSMISSION CONTROL
                                                        46
                                PROTOCOL (TCP) FUNDAMENTALS
                                   AND GENERAL OPERATION




                                             Many people have a difficult time under-
                                            standing how the Transmission Control
                                         Protocol (TCP) works. After spending dozens
                                   of hours writing almost 100 pages on the protocol,
                               I am quite sympathetic! I think a main reason for the
                               difficulty is that many descriptions of the protocol leap
                               too quickly from a brief introduction straight into the mind-boggling details
                               of TCP’s operation. The problem is that TCP works in a very particular way.
                               Its operation is built around a few very important fundamentals that you
                               absolutely must understand before the details of TCP operation will make
                               much sense.
                                    In this chapter, I describe some of the key operating fundamentals of
                               TCP. I begin with a discussion of how TCP handles data and introduce the
                               concepts of streams, segments, and sequences. I then describe the very
                               important TCP sliding window system, which is used for acknowledgment,
                               reliability, and data flow control. I discuss how TCP uses ports and how it
                               identifies connections. I also describe the most important applications that
                               use TCP and what ports they use for server applications.
tcpip46_02.fm Page 728 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




              TCP Data Handling and Processing
                        One of the givens in the operation of most of the protocols you’ll find at upper
                        layers in the OSI Reference Model is that the protocols are oriented around the use
                        of messages. These messages are analogous to a written letter in an envelope that
                        contains a specific piece of information. They are passed from higher layers down
                        to lower ones, where they are encapsulated in the lower layers’ headers (like
                        putting them in another envelope), and then passed down further until they are
                        actually sent out at the physical layer.
                             You can see a good example of this by looking at the User Datagram Protocol
                        (UDP), TCP’s transport layer peer. To use UDP, an application passes it a distinct
                        block of data that is usually fairly short. The block is packaged into a UDP message,
                        then sent to the Internet Protocol (IP). IP packs the message into an IP datagram
                        and eventually passes it to a layer 2 protocol such as Ethernet. There, IP places it
                        into a frame and sends it to layer 1 for transmission.

                        Increasing the Flexibility of Application Data Handling: TCP’s Stream Orientation
                        The use of discrete messaging is pretty simple, and it obviously works well enough
                        since most protocols make use of it. However, it is inherently limiting because it
                        forces applications to create discrete blocks of data in order to communicate.
                        There are many applications that need to send information continuously in a
                        manner that doesn’t lend itself well to creating “chunks” of data. Others need to
                        send data in chunks that are so large that applications could never send them as a
                        single message at the lower layers.
                            To use a protocol like UDP, many applications would be forced to artificially
                        divide their data into messages of a size that has no inherent meaning to them. This
                        would immediately introduce new problems that would require more work for the
                        application. The application would have to keep track of what data is in what message,
                        and replace any data that was lost. It would need to ensure that the messages could
                        be reassembled in the correct order, since IP might deliver them out of order.
                            Of course, you could program applications to do this, but it would make little
                        sense, because these functions are already ones that TCP is charged with handling.
                        Instead, the TCP designers took the very smart approach of generalizing TCP so
                        that it could accept application data of any size and structure without requiring the
                        data to be in discrete pieces. More specifically, TCP treats data coming from an
                        application as a stream—thus, the description of TCP as stream-oriented. Each appli-
                        cation sends the data it wishes to transmit as a steady stream of octets (bytes). The
                        application doesn’t need to carve the data into blocks or worry about how lengthy
                        streams will get across the internetwork. It just “pumps bytes” to TCP.

                        TCP Data Packaging: Segments
                        TCP must take the bytes it gets from an application and send them using a network
                        layer protocol, which is IP in this case. IP is a message-oriented protocol; it is not
                        stream-oriented. Thus, we have simply “passed the buck” to TCP, which must take
                        the stream from the application and divide it into discrete messages for IP. These
                        messages are called TCP segments.

        728     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 729 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                      NOTE       Segment is one of the most confusing data structure names in the world of networking.
                      From a dictionary definition standpoint, referring to a piece of a stream as a segment is sensible,
                      but most people working with networks don’t think of a message as being a segment. In the indus-
                      try, the term also refers to a length of cable or a part of a local area network (LAN), among other
                      things, so watch out for that.

                           IP treats TCP segments like all other discrete messages for transmission. IP
                      places them into IP datagrams and transmits them to the destination device. The
                      recipient unpackages the segments and passes them to TCP, which converts them
                      back to a byte stream in order to send them to the application. This process is
                      illustrated in Figure 46-1.

                        KEY CONCEPT         TCP is designed to have applications send data to it as a stream of bytes,
                        rather than requiring fixed-size messages to be used. This provides maximum flexibility for a
                        wide variety of uses, because applications don’t need to worry about data packaging and can
                        send files or messages of any size. TCP takes care of packaging these bytes into messages
                        called segments.


                           The TCP layer on a device accumulates data that it receives from the applica-
                      tion process stream. On regular intervals, the TCP layer forms segments that it will
                      transmit using IP. Two primary factors control the size of the segment. First, there
                      is an overall limit to the size of a segment, chosen to prevent unnecessary fragmen-
                      tation at the IP layer. A parameter called the maximum segment size (MSS) governs
                      this size limit. The MSS is determined during connection establishment. Second,
                      TCP is designed so that once a connection is set up, each of the devices tells the
                      other how much data it is ready to accept at any given time. If the data is lower than
                      the MSS value, the device must send a smaller segment. This is part of the sliding
                      window system described a little later in this chapter.

                      TCP Data Identification: Sequence Numbers
                      The fact that TCP treats data coming from an application as a stream of octets has a
                      couple of very significant implications for the operation of the protocol. The first is
                      related to data identification. Since TCP is reliable, it needs to keep track of all the
                      data it receives from an application so it can make sure that the destination receives
                      all the data. Furthermore, TCP must make sure that the destination receives the
                      data in the order that the application sent it, and the destination must retransmit
                      any lost data.
                           If a device conveyed data to TCP in block-like messages, it would be fairly simple
                      to keep track of the data by adding an identifier to each message. Because TCP is
                      stream-oriented, however, that identification must be done for each byte of data! This
                      may seem surprising, but it is actually what TCP does through the use of sequence
                      numbers. Each byte of data is assigned a sequence number that is used to keep track
                      of it through the process of transmission, reception, and acknowledgment (though
                      in practice, blocks of many bytes are managed using the sequence numbers of bytes
                      at the start and end of the block). These sequence numbers are used to ensure that
                      the sending application transmits and reassembles the segmented data into the
                      original stream of data. The sequence numbers are required to implement the
                      sliding window system, which enables TCP to provide reliability and data flow control.

                                                        T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   729
tcpip46_02.fm Page 730 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                        Figure 46-1: TCP data stream processing and segment packaging TCP is different from most protocols
                        because it does not require applications that use it to send data to it in messages. Once a TCP connection
                        is set up, an application protocol can send TCP a steady stream of bytes that does not need to conform
                        to any particular structure. TCP packages these bytes into segments that are sized based on a number of
                        different parameters. These segments are passed to IP, where they are encapsulated into IP datagrams and
                        transmitted. The receiving device reverses the process: Segments are removed from IP datagrams, and then
                        the bytes are taken from the segments and passed up to the appropriate recipient application protocol as
                        a byte stream.


                           KEY CONCEPT Since TCP works with individual bytes of data rather than discrete messages,
                           it must use an identification scheme that works at the byte level to implement its data trans-
                           mission and tracking system. This is accomplished by assigning a sequence number to each byte
                           that TCP processes.




        730     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 731 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                      The Need for Application Data Delimiting
                      When TCP treats incoming data as a stream, the data the application using TCP
                      receives is called unstructured. For transmission, a stream of data goes into TCP on
                      the sending device, and on reception, a stream of data goes back to the application
                      on the receiving device. Even though TCP breaks the stream into segments for
                      transmission, these segments are TCP-level details that remain hidden from the
                      application. When a device wants to send multiple pieces of data, TCP provides no
                      mechanism for indicating where the dividing line is between the pieces, since TCP
                      doesn’t examine the meaning of the data. The application must provide a means
                      for doing this.
                           Consider, for example, an application that is sending database records. It
                      needs to transmit record 579 from the Employees database table, followed by
                      record 581 and record 611. It sends these records to TCP, which treats them all
                      collectively as a stream of bytes. TCP will package these bytes into segments, but in a
                      way that the application cannot predict. It is possible that each byte will end up in a
                      different segment, but more likely that they will all be in one segment, or that part
                      of each will end up in different segments, depending on their length. The records
                      must have some sort of explicit markers so that the receiving device can tell where
                      one record ends and the next starts.


                        KEY CONCEPT        Since applications send data to TCP as a stream of bytes as opposed to
                        prepackaged messages, each application must use its own scheme to determine where one
                        application data element ends and the next begins.



             TCP Sliding Window Acknowledgment System
                      What differentiates TCP from simpler transport protocols like UDP is the quality of
                      the manner in which it sends data between devices. Rather than just sticking data in
                      a message and saying, “off you go,” TCP carefully keeps track of the data it sends.
                      This management of data is required to facilitate the following two key requirements
                      of the protocol:

                      Reliability Ensuring that data that is sent actually arrives at its destination, and if it
                      doesn’t arrive, detecting this and resending it.
                      Data Flow Control Managing the rate at which data is sent so that it does not over-
                      whelm the device that is receiving it.

                           To accomplish these tasks, the entire operation of the protocol is oriented
                      around something called the sliding window acknowledgment system. It is no exaggera-
                      tion to say that comprehending how sliding windows work is critical to understanding
                      just about everything else in TCP. It is also, unfortunately, a bit hard to follow if you
                      try to grasp it all at once. I wanted to make sure that I explained the mechanism
                      thoroughly without assuming that you already understood it. For this reason, I am
                      going to start by explaining the concepts behind sliding windows, particularly how
                      the technique works and why it is so powerful.


                                                        T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   731
tcpip46_02.fm Page 732 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                        The Problem with Unreliable Protocols: Lack of Feedback
                        A simple “send and forget” protocol like IP is unreliable and includes no flow
                        control for one main reason: It is an open-loop system in which the transmitter
                        receives no feedback from the recipient. (I am ignoring error reports using ICMP
                        and the like for the purpose of this discussion.) A datagram is sent, and it may or
                        may not get there, but the transmitter will never have any way of knowing because
                        there is no mechanism for feedback. This concept is illustrated in Figure 46-2.




                        Figure 46-2: Operation of an unreliable protocol In a system such as the one that IP uses, if a message
                        gets to its destination, that’s great; otherwise, nobody will have a clue. Some external mechanism is
                        needed to take care of the lost message, unless the protocol doesn’t really care whether a few bits and
                        pieces are missing from its message stream.


                        Providing Basic Reliability Using Positive Acknowledgment with
                        Retransmission (PAR)
                        Basic reliability in a protocol running over an unreliable protocol like IP can be
                        implemented by closing the loop so the recipient provides feedback to the sender.
                        This is most easily done with a simple acknowledgment system. Device A sends a
                        piece of data to Device B, which receives the data and sends back an acknowl-
                        edgment saying, “Device A, I received your message.” Device A then knows its
                        transmission was successful.
                             But since IP is unreliable, that message may in fact never get to where it is
                        going. Device A will sit and wait for the acknowledgment and never receive it.
                        Conversely, it is also possible that Device B gets the message from Device A, but the
                        acknowledgment itself vanishes somehow. In either case, we don’t want Device A to
                        sit forever waiting for an acknowledgment that is never going to arrive.
                             To prevent this from happening, Device A starts a timer when it first sends the
                        message to Device B, which allows sufficient time for the message to get to Device B
                        and for the acknowledgment to travel back, plus some reasonable time to allow for
                        possible delays. If the timer expires before the acknowledgment is received, Device
                        A assumes that there was a problem and retransmits its original message. Since this
                        method involves positive acknowledgments (“Yes, I got your message”) and a facility
                        for retransmission when needed, it is commonly called positive acknowledgment with
                        retransmission (PAR), as shown in Figure 46-3.


        732     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 733 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                      Figure 46-3: Basic reliability: positive acknowledgment with retransmission (PAR) This diagram shows
                      one of the most common and simple techniques for ensuring reliability. Each time Device A sends a mes-
                      sage, it starts a timer. Device B sends an acknowledgment back to Device A when it receives a message,
                      so that Device A knows that it successfully transmitted the message. If a message is lost, the timer goes
                      off, and Device A retransmits the data. Note that only one message can be outstanding at any time, mak-
                      ing this system rather slow.


                        KEY CONCEPT         A basic technique for ensuring reliability in communications uses a rule that
                        requires a device to send back an acknowledgment each time it successfully receives a trans-
                        mission. If a device doesn’t acknowledge the transmission after a period of time, its sender
                        retransmits the acknowledgment. This system is called positive acknowledgment with retrans-
                        mission (PAR). One drawback with this basic scheme is that the transmitter cannot send a second
                        message until after the first device has acknowledged the first.


                          PAR is a technique that is used widely in networking and communications for
                      protocols that exchange relatively small amounts of data, or protocols that exchange
                      data infrequently. The basic method is functional, but it is not well suited to a
                      protocol like TCP. One main reason is that it is inefficient. Device A sends a message,
                      and then waits for the acknowledgment. Device A cannot send another message to
                      Device B until it hears that Device B received its original message, which is very
                      wasteful and would make the protocol extremely slow.


                                                        T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   733
tcpip46_02.fm Page 734 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                        Improving PAR
                        The first improvement we can make to the PAR system is to provide some means of
                        identification to the messages that were sent, as well as the acknowledgments. For
                        example, we could put a message ID field in the message header. The device sending
                        the message would uniquely identify it, and the recipient would use this identifier
                        in the acknowledgment. For example, Device A might send a piece of data in a
                        message with the message ID 1. Device B would receive the message and then send
                        its own message back to Device A, saying “Device A, I received your message 1.”
                        The advantage of this system is that Device A can send multiple messages at once.
                        It must keep track of each one that it sends, and whether or not Device B sent an
                        acknowledgment. Each device also requires a separate timer, but that’s not a big
                        problem.
                             Of course, we also need to consider this exchange from the standpoint of De-
                        vice B. Before, Device B had to deal with only one message at a time from Device A.
                        Now it may have several show up all at once. What if it is already busy with transmis-
                        sions from another device (or ten)? We need some mechanism that lets Device B say,
                        “I am only willing to handle the following number of messages from you at a time.”
                        We could do that by having the acknowledgment message contain a field, such as
                        send limit, which specifies the maximum number of unacknowledged messages
                        Device A was allowed to have in transit to Device B at one time.
                             Device A would use this send limit field to restrict the rate at which it sent
                        messages to Device B. Device B could adjust this field depending on its current load
                        and other factors to maximize performance in its discussions with Device A. This
                        enhanced system would thus provide reliability, efficiency, and basic data flow
                        control, as illustrated in Figure 46-4.


                           KEY CONCEPT          The basic PAR reliability scheme can be enhanced by identifying each
                           message to be sent, so multiple messages can be in transit at once. The use of a send limit
                           allows the mechanism to also provide flow control capabilities, by allowing each device to
                           control the rate at which other devices send data to it.


                        TCP’s Stream-Oriented Sliding Window Acknowledgment System
                        So does TCP use this variation on PAR? Of course not! That would be too simple.
                        Conceptually, the TCP sliding window system is very similar to this method, which is
                        why it is important that you understand it. However, it requires some adjustment.
                        The main reason has to do with the way TCP handles data: the matter of stream
                        orientation compared to message orientation discussed earlier in this chapter. The
                        technique I have outlined involves explicit acknowledgments and (if necessary)
                        retransmissions for messages. Thus, it would work well for a protocol that exchanged
                        reasonably large messages on a fairly infrequent basis.
                            TCP, on the other hand, deals with individual bytes of data as a stream. Trans-
                        mitting each byte one at a time and acknowledging each one at a time would quite
                        obviously be absurd. It would require too much work, and even with overlapped
                        transmissions (that is, not waiting for an acknowledgment before sending the next
                        piece of data), the result would be horribly slow.


        734     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 735 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                      Figure 46-4: Enhanced PAR This diagram shows two enhancements to the basic PAR scheme from
                      Figure 46-3. First, each message now has an identification number; each can be acknowledged individ-
                      ually, so more than one message can be in transit at a given time. Second, Device B regularly communi-
                      cates to Device A a send limit parameter, which restricts the number of messages Device A can have
                      outstanding at once. Device B can adjust this parameter to control the flow of data from Device A.

                           This slowness is why TCP does not send bytes individually but divides them into
                      segments. All of the bytes in a segment are sent together and received together,
                      and thus acknowledged together. TCP uses a variation on the method I described
                      earlier, in which the sequence numbers I discussed earlier identify the data sent
                      and acknowledged. Instead of acknowledging the use of something like a message
                      ID field, we acknowledge data using the sequence number of the last byte of data in
                      the segment. Thus, we are dealing with a range of bytes in each case, and the range
                      represents the sequence numbers of all the bytes in the segment.

                      Conceptual Division of TCP Transmission Stream into Categories
                      Imagine a newly established TCP connection between Device A and Device B.
                      Device A has a long stream of bytes that it will transmit, but Device B can’t accept
                      them all at once, so it limits Device A to sending a particular number of bytes at
                      once in segments, until the bytes in the segments already sent have been



                                                        T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   735
tcpip46_02.fm Page 736 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                        acknowledged. Then Device A is allowed to send more bytes. Each device keeps
                        track of which bytes have been sent and which have not, and which have been
                        acknowledged.
                             At any point in time, we can take a “snapshot” of the process. If we do, we can
                        conceptually divide the bytes that the sending TCP has in its buffer into the
                        following four categories, and view them as a timeline (see Figure 46-5):

                        1.        Bytes Sent and Acknowledged The earliest bytes in the stream will have been
                                  sent and acknowledged. These bytes are basically viewed from the standpoint
                                  of the device sending data. In the example in Figure 46-5, 31 bytes of data have
                                  already been sent and acknowledged. These would fall into category 1.
                        2.        Bytes Sent but Not Yet Acknowledged These are the bytes that the device has
                                  sent but for which it has not yet received an acknowledgment. The sender can-
                                  not consider these handled until they are acknowledged. In Figure 46-5, there
                                  are 14 bytes here, in category 2.
                        3.        Bytes Not Yet Sent for Which Recipient Is Ready These are bytes that the
                                  device has not sent, but which the recipient has room for based on its most
                                  recent communication to the sender regarding how many bytes it is willing to
                                  handle at once. The sender will try to send these immediately (subject to cer-
                                  tain algorithmic restrictions that you’ll explore later). In Figure 46-5, there are
                                  6 bytes in category 3.
                        4.        Bytes Not Yet Sent for Which Recipient Is Not Ready These are the bytes fur-
                                  ther down the stream, which the sender is not yet allowed to send because the
                                  receiver is not ready. In Figure 46-5, there are 44 bytes in category 4.




                        Figure 46-5: Conceptual division of TCP transmission stream into categories

                        NOTE     I am using very small numbers here to keep the example simple and to make the dia-
                        grams a bit easier to construct! TCP does not normally send tiny numbers of bytes around for
                        efficiency reasons.

                            The receiving device uses a similar system in order to differentiate between
                        data received and acknowledged, data not yet received but ready to receive, and data
                        not yet received and not yet ready to be received. In fact, both devices maintain a
                        separate set of variables to keep track of the categories into which bytes fall in the
                        stream they are sending, as well as the stream they are receiving. This is explored
                        further in Chapter 48’s section named “TCP Sliding Window Data Transfer and
                        Acknowledgment Mechanics,” which describes the detailed sliding window data
                        transfer procedure.


        736     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 737 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                           KEY CONCEPT The TCP sliding window system is a variation on the enhanced PAR system,
                           with changes made to support TCP’s stream orientation. Each device keeps track of the status of
                           the byte stream that it needs to transmit. The device keeps track by dividing the byte streams into
                           four conceptual categories: bytes sent and acknowledged, bytes sent but not yet acknowledged,
                           bytes not yet sent but that can be sent immediately, and bytes not yet sent that cannot be sent
                           until the recipient signals that it is ready for them.


                      Sequence Number Assignment and Synchronization
                      The sender and receiver must agree on the sequence numbers that they will assign
                      to the bytes in the stream. This is called synchronization and is done when the TCP
                      connection is established. For simplicity, let’s assume that the first byte was sent
                      with sequence number 1 (this is not normally the case). Thus, in the example
                      shown in Figure 46-5, the byte ranges for the four categories are as follows:

                      1.     The bytes sent and acknowledged are bytes 1 to 31.
                      2.     The bytes sent but not yet acknowledged are bytes 32 to 45.
                      3.     The bytes not yet sent for which the recipient is ready are bytes 46 to 51.
                      4.     The bytes not yet sent for which the recipient is not ready are bytes 52 to 95.

                      The Send Window and Usable Window
                      The key to the operation of the entire process is the number of bytes that the
                      recipient is allowing the transmitter to have unacknowledged at one time. This is
                      called the send window, or often, just the window. The window is what determines
                      how many bytes the sender is allowed to transmit, and is equal to the sum of the
                      number of bytes in category 2 and category 3. Thus, the dividing line between the
                      last two categories (bytes not sent that the recipient is ready for and bytes the
                      recipient is not ready for) is determined by adding the window to the byte number
                      of the first unacknowledged byte in the stream. In the example shown in Figure 46-5,
                      the first unacknowledged byte is 32. The total window size is 20.
                           The term usable window is defined as the amount of data the transmitter is still
                      allowed to send given the amount of data that is outstanding. It is thus exactly equal
                      to the size of category 3. You may also commonly hear the edges of the window
                      mentioned. The left edge marks the first byte in the window (byte 32). The right
                      edge marks the last byte in the window (byte 51). See Figure 46-6 for an illustration
                      of these concepts.


                           KEY CONCEPT The send window is the key to the entire TCP sliding window system. It
                           represents the maximum number of unacknowledged bytes that a device is allowed to have
                           outstanding at one time. The usable window is the amount of the send window that the sender is
                           still allowed to send at any point in time; it is equal to the size of the send window less the
                           number of unacknowledged bytes already transmitted.




                                                        T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   737
tcpip46_02.fm Page 738 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                        Figure 46-6: TCP transmission stream categories and send window terminology This diagram shows the
                        same categories as the ones in Figure 46-5, except that it shows the send window as well. The black box
                        is the overall send window (categories 2 and 3 combined); the light gray box represents the bytes
                        already sent (category 2), and the dark gray box is the usable window (category 3).

                        Changes to TCP Categories and Window Sizes After Sending Bytes in the Usable Window
                        Now let’s suppose that in the example shown in Figure 46-6 there is nothing
                        stopping the sender from immediately transmitting the 6 bytes in category 3
                        (the usable window). When the sender transmits them, the 6 bytes will shift from
                        category 3 to category 2. The byte ranges will now be as follows (see Figure 46-7):

                        1.        The bytes sent and acknowledged are bytes 1 to 31.
                        2.        The bytes sent but not yet acknowledged are bytes 32 to 51.
                        3.        The bytes not yet sent for which the recipient is ready are none.
                        4.        The bytes not yet sent for which the recipient is not ready are bytes 52 to 95.




                        Figure 46-7: TCP stream categories and window after sending usable window bytes This diagram
                        shows the result of the device sending all the bytes that it is allowed to transmit in its usable window. It is
                        the same as Figure 46-6, except that all the bytes in category 3 have moved to category 2. The usable
                        window is now zero and will remain so until it receives an acknowledgment for bytes in category 2.

                        Processing Acknowledgments and Sliding the Send Window
                        Some time later, the destination device sends back a message to the sender and
                        provides an acknowledgment. The destination device will not specifically list out
                        the bytes that it has acknowledged, because as I said earlier, listing the bytes would


        738     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 739 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                      be inefficient. Instead, the destination device will acknowledge a range of bytes that
                      represents the longest contiguous sequence of bytes it has received since the ones it
                      had previously acknowledged.
                           For example, let’s suppose that the bytes already sent but not yet acknowledged
                      at the start of the example (bytes 32 to 45) were transmitted in four different
                      segments. These segments carried bytes 32 to 34, 35 to 36, 37 to 41, and 42 to 45,
                      respectively. The first, second, and fourth segments arrived, but the third did not.
                      The receiver will send back an acknowledgment only for bytes 32 to 36 (32 to 34
                      and 35 to 36). The receiver will hold bytes 42 to 45 but won’t acknowledge them,
                      because this would imply that the receiver has received bytes 37 to 41, which have
                      not shown up yet. This is necessary because TCP is a cumulative acknowledgment
                      system that can use only a single number to acknowledge data. That number is the
                      number of the last contiguous byte in the stream that was successfully received.
                      Let’s also say that the destination keeps the window size the same at 20 bytes.

                      NOTE An optional feature called selective acknowledgments does allow noncontiguous blocks
                      of data to be acknowledged. This is explained in Chapter 49’s section named “TCP Noncontiguous
                      Acknowledgment Handling and Selective Acknowledgment (SACK)”; we’ll ignore this complica-
                      tion for now.

                           When the sending device receives this acknowledgment, it will be able to
                      transfer some of the bytes from category 2 to category 1, because they have now
                      been acknowledged. When it does so, something interesting will happen. Since 5
                      bytes have been acknowledged, and the window size didn’t change, the sender is
                      allowed to send 5 more bytes. In effect, the window shifts or slides over to the right
                      in the timeline. At the same time 5 bytes move from category 2 to category 1, 5 bytes
                      move from category 4 to category 3, creating a new usable window for subsequent
                      transmission. So, after the groups receive the acknowledgment, they will look like
                      what you see in Figure 46-8. The byte ranges will be as follows:

                      1.    The bytes sent and acknowledged are bytes 1 to 36.
                      2.    The bytes sent but not yet acknowledged are bytes 37 to 51.
                      3.    The bytes not yet sent for which the recipient is ready are bytes 52 to 56.
                      4.    The bytes not yet sent for which the recipient is not ready are bytes 57 to 95.




                      Figure 46-8: Sliding the TCP send window After receiving acknowledgment for bytes 32 to 36, the
                      bytes move from category 2 to 1 (shown in dark shading). The send window shown in Figure 46-7 slides
                      right by 5 bytes; shifting 5 bytes from category 4 to 3, and opening a new usable window.


                                                        T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   739
tcpip46_02.fm Page 740 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                             This process will occur each time an acknowledgment is received, thereby
                        causing the window to slide across the entire stream in order to be transmitted.
                        And thus, ladies and gentlemen, you have the TCP sliding window acknowledg-
                        ment system!
                             It is a very powerful technique that allows TCP to easily acknowledge an arbi-
                        trary number of bytes using a single acknowledgment number. It provides reliability
                        to the byte-oriented protocol without spending time on an excessive number of
                        acknowledgments. For simplicity, the example I’ve used here leaves the window size
                        constant, but in reality, it can be adjusted to allow a recipient to control the rate at
                        which data is sent, thereby enabling flow control and congestion handling.


                           KEY CONCEPT         When a device gets an acknowledgment for a range of bytes, it knows the
                           destination has successfully received them. It moves them from the “sent but unacknowledged” to
                           the “sent and acknowledged” category. This causes the send window to slide to the right,
                           allowing the device to send more data.


                        Dealing with Missing Acknowledgments
                        But what about bytes 42 through 45 in the example shown in Figure 46-8? Until seg-
                        ment 3 (containing bytes 37 to 41) shows up, the receiving device will not send an
                        acknowledgment for those bytes, and it won’t send any others that show up after it.
                        The sending device will be able to send the new bytes that were added to category 3,
                        namely, bytes 52 to 56. The sending device will then stop, and the window will be
                        stuck on bytes 37 to 41.


                           KEY CONCEPT TCP acknowledgments are cumulative and tell a transmitter that the receiving
                           device successfully received all the bytes up to the sequence number indicated in the acknowl-
                           edgment. Thus, if the receiving device receives bytes out of order, the device cannot acknowledge
                           them until all the preceding bytes are received.


                             Like the PAR system, TCP includes a system for timing transmissions and
                        retransmitting. Eventually, the TCP device will resend the lost segment. Unfor-
                        tunately, one drawback of TCP is that since it does not separately acknowledge
                        segments, it may have to retransmit other segments that the recipient actually
                        received (such as the segment with bytes 42 to 45). This starts to get very complex,
                        as I discussed in the topic on TCP retransmissions in Chapter 49.

                        More Information on TCP Sliding Windows
                        Despite the length of this explanation, the preceding is just a summary description
                        of the overall operation of sliding windows. This chapter does not include all of the
                        modifications used in modern TCP! As you can see, the sliding window mechanism
                        is at the heart of the operation of TCP as a whole. In the chapter that describes seg-
                        ments and discusses data transfer, you will see in more detail how TCP transmitters
                        decide how and when to create segments for transmission. Chapter 49 provides
                        much more information about how sliding windows enable a device to manage the
                        flow of data to it on a TCP connection. It also discusses special problems that can

        740     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 741 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                      arise if window size is not carefully managed and how you can avoid problems such
                      as congestion in TCP implementations through key changes to the basic sliding
                      window mechanism described in this section.

             TCP Ports, Connections, and Connection Identification
                      The two TCP/IP transport layer protocols, TCP and UDP, play the same architec-
                      tural role in the protocol suite, but do it in very different ways. In fact, one of the
                      few functions that the two have in common is that they both provide a method of
                      transport layer addressing and multiplexing. Through the use of ports, both protocols
                      allow the data from many different application processes to be aggregated and sent
                      through the IP layer, and then returned up the stack to the proper application
                      process on the destination device. I explain TCP ports in detail in Chapter 43.
                           Despite this commonality, TCP and UDP diverge somewhat even in how they
                      deal with processes. UDP is a connectionless protocol, which means that devices do
                      not set up a formal connection before sending data. UDP does not have to use
                      sliding windows or keep track of how long it has been since UDP sent a transmission
                      and so forth. When the UDP layer on a device receives data, it just sends it to the
                      process that the destination port indicates, and that’s that. UDP can seamlessly
                      handle any number of processes that are sending it messages because UDP handles
                      them all identically.
                           In contrast, since TCP is connection-oriented, it has many more responsibilities.
                      Each TCP software layer needs to be able to support connections to several other
                      TCPs simultaneously. The operation of each connection is separate from of each
                      other connection, and the TCP software must manage each operation indepen-
                      dently. TCP must be sure that it not only routes data to the right process, but that it
                      also manages transmitted data on each connection without any overlap or confusion.
                           The first consequence of this is that TCP must uniquely identify each connec-
                      tion. It does this by using the pair of socket identifiers that correspond to the two
                      endpoints of the connection, where a socket is simply the combination of the IP
                      address and the port number of each process. This means a socket pair contains
                      four pieces of information: source address, source port, destination address, and
                      destination port. Thus, TCP connections are sometimes said to be described by this
                      addressing quadruple.
                           I introduced this concept in Chapter 43, where I gave the example of a
                      Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) request that a client sends at 177.41.72.6 to a
                      website at 41.199.222.3. The server for that website will use well-known port number
                      80, so the server’s socket is 41.199.222.3:80. If the server assigns a client ephemeral
                      port number 3022 for the web browser, the client socket is 177.41.72.6:3022. The
                      overall connection between these devices can be described using this socket pair:
                      (41.199.222.3:80, 177.41.72.6:3022).
                           This identification of connections using both client and server sockets is what
                      provides the flexibility in allowing multiple connections between devices that we
                      probably take for granted on the Internet. For example, busy application server
                      processes (such as web servers) must be able to handle connections from more
                      than one client; otherwise, the Web would be pretty much unusable. Since the
                      client and server’s socket identify the connection, this is no problem. At the same


                                                        T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   741
tcpip46_02.fm Page 742 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




                        time that the web server maintains the connection, it can easily have another
                        connection to say, port 2199 at IP address 219.31.0.44. The connection identifier
                        that represents this as follows: (41.199.222.3:80, 219.31.0.44:2199).
                             In fact, you can have multiple connections from the same client to the same
                        server. Each client process will be assigned a different ephemeral port number, so
                        even if they all try to access the same server process (such as the web server process
                        at 41.199.222.3:80), they will all have a different client socket and represent unique
                        connections. This difference is what lets you make several simultaneous requests to
                        the same website from your computer.
                             Again, TCP keeps track of each of these connections independently, so each
                        connection is unaware of the others. TCP can handle hundreds or even thousands
                        of simultaneous connections. The only limit is the capacity of the computer running
                        TCP, and the bandwidth of the physical connections to it—the more connections
                        running at once, the more each one has to share limited resources.


                           KEY CONCEPT        Each device can handle simultaneous TCP connections to many different
                           processes on one or more devices. The socket numbers of the devices in the connection, called
                           the connection’s endpoints, identify each connection. Each endpoint consists of the device’s IP
                           address and port number, so the four-way communication between client IP address and port
                           number, and server IP address and port number identifies each connection.



              TCP Common Applications and Server Port Assignments
                        In the overview of TCP in Chapter 45, you saw that the protocol originally included
                        the functions of both modern TCP and IP. TCP was split into TCP and IP in order
                        to allow applications that didn’t need TCP’s complexity to bypass it, using the much
                        simpler UDP as a transport layer protocol instead. This bypass was an important
                        step in the development of the TCP/IP protocol suite, since there are several
                        important protocols for which UDP is ideally suited, and even some for which TCP
                        is more of a nuisance than a benefit.
                              Most commonly, however, UDP is used only in special cases. I describe the two
                        types of applications that may be better suited to UDP than TCP in Chapter 44:
                        applications where speed is more important than reliability, and applications that
                        send only short messages infrequently. The majority of TCP/IP applications do not
                        fall into these categories. Thus, even though the layering of TCP and IP means that
                        most protocols aren’t required to use TCP, most of them do anyway. The majority
                        of the protocols that use TCP employ all, or at least most, of the features that it
                        provides. The establishment of a persistent connection is necessary for many
                        interactive protocols, such as Telnet, as well as for ones that send commands and
                        status replies, like HTTP. Reliability and flow control are essential for protocols like
                        the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) or the email protocols, which send large files.
                              Table 46-1 shows some of the more significant application protocols that run
                        on TCP. For each protocol, I have shown the well-known or registered port number
                        that’s reserved for that protocol’s server process (clients use ephemeral ports, not
                        the port numbers in the table). I have also shown the special keyword shortcut for
                        each port assignment and provided brief comments on why the protocol is well
                        matched to TCP.

        742     C h ap te r 4 6
tcpip46_02.fm Page 743 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM




        Table 46-1: Common TCP Applications and Server Port Assignments

         Port #     Keyword         Protocol                              Comments

         20 and     ftp-data/ftp    File Transfer Protocol (FTP,          Used to send large files, so it is ideally suited for TCP.
         21                         data and control)
         23         telnet          Telnet Protocol                       Interactive session-based protocol. Requires the connection-
                                                                          based nature of TCP.
         25         smtp            Simple Mail Transfer Protocol         Uses an exchange of commands, and sends possibly large files
                                    (SMTP)                                between devices.
         53         domain          Domain Name Server (DNS)              An example of a protocol that uses both UDP and TCP. For
                                                                          simple requests and replies, DNS uses UDP. For larger
                                                                          messages, especially zone transfers, DNS uses TCP.
         70         gopher          Gopher Protocol                       A messaging protocol that has been largely replaced by the
                                                                          WWW.

         80         http            Hypertext Transfer Protocol           The classic example of a TCP-based messaging protocol.
                                    (HTTP/World Wide Web)
         110        pop3            Post Office Protocol (POP             Email message retrieval protocols that use TCP to exchange
                                    version 3)                            commands and data.
         119        nntp            Network News Transfer                 Used for transferring NetNews (Usenet) messages, which can
                                    Protocol (NNTP)                       be lengthy.
         139        netbios-ssn     NetBIOS Session Service               A session protocol, clearly better suited to TCP than UDP.
         143        imap            Internet Message Access               Another email message retrieval protocol.
                                    Protocol (IMAP)
         179        bgp             Border Gateway Protocol               While interior routing protocols like RIP and OSPF use either
                                    (BGP)                                 UDP or IP directly, BGP runs over TCP. This allows BGP to
                                                                          assume reliable communication even as it sends data over
                                                                          potentially long distances.
         194        irc             Internet Relay Chat (IRC)             IRC is like Telnet in that it is an interactive protocol that is
                                                                          strongly based on the notion of a persistent connection between
                                                                          a client and server.
         2049       nfs             Network File System (NFS)             NFS was originally implemented using UDP for performance
                                                                          reasons. Given that it is responsible for large transfers of files
                                                                          and given UDP’s unreliability, NFS was probably not the best
                                                                          idea, so developers created TCP versions. The latest version of
                                                                          NFS uses TCP exclusively.
         6000–      TCP             x11                                   Used for the X Window graphical system. Multiple ports are
         6063                                                             dedicated to allow many sessions.


                          A couple of the protocols in Table 46-1 use both TCP and UDP in order to get
                      the best of both worlds. UDP can send short, simple messages, while TCP moves
                      larger files. Many of the protocols that use both TCP and UDP are actually utility/
                      diagnostic protocols (such as Echo, Discard, and the Time Protocol). These are
                      special cases, because they developers designed them to use both UDP and TCP
                      specifically to allow their use for diagnostics on both protocols.
                          I have not included an exhaustive list of TCP applications in Table 46-1. See
                      Chapter 42 for common TCP/IP applications and port numbers, and also a
                      reference to the full (massive) list of well-known and registered TCP server ports.



                                                          T ra ns m is s ion C o nt ro l P rot oc ol ( T C P) Fu nd am en t al s an d Gen era l Op er at ion   743
tcpip46_02.fm Page 744 Friday, June 17, 2005 12:58 PM
