How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow




                PART II
                           TRY HARDER

      You're unlikely to discover something new without a lot of practice on old stuff.
                                   Richard P. Feynman
How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow
 How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow




                                   4
                 H E A LT H Y S TA L K I N G




            Our bouncing servers are silently humming
            in a datacenter somewhere in Europe. Our
          attacking infrastructure is eagerly awaiting
       our first order. Before we unleash the plethora
of attack tools that routinely flood the infosec Twitter
timeline, let’s take a couple of minutes to understand
how Gretsch Politico actually works. What is their
business model? Which products and services do they provide? This kind
of information will give us a direction to go in and help us narrow down
attack targets. Drawing tangible goals may very well be our first challenge.
Their main website (www.gretschpolitico.com/) does not exactly help: it is a
boiling, bubbling soup of fuzzy marketing keywords that only make sense
to the initiated. We’ll start, then, with benign public-facing information.
                   How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

     Understanding Gretsch Politico
                 In an effort to better understand this industry, let’s dig up every PowerPoint
                 deck and PDF presentation that bears a reference to “Gretsch Politico” (GP).
                 SlideShare (https://www.slideshare.net/) proves to be an invaluable ally in this
                 quest. Many people simply forget to delete their presentations after a talk, or
                 default them to “public access,” giving us a plethora of information to begin
                 our quest for understanding (see Figure 4-1).




                 Figure 4-1: Some Gretsch Politico slides

                     SlideShare is but one example of services hosting documents, so we
                 next scour the web looking for resources uploaded to the most popular
                 sharing platforms: Scribd, Google Drive, DocumentCloud, you name it.
                 The following search terms will narrow down your results in most search
                 engines:

                 # Lookup public Google Drive documents
                 site:docs.google.com "Gretsch politico"

                 # Search for documents on documentcloud.org
                 site:documentcloud.org "Gretsch politico"

                 # Documents uploaded to Scribd
                 site:scribd.com "gretschpolitico.com"

                 # Public power point presentations
                 intext:"Gretsch politico" filetype:pptx

                 # Public PDF documents
                 intext:"Gretsch politico" filetype:pdf

                 # Docx documents on GP’s website
                 intext:"Gretsch politico" filetype:docx

                     Google may be your default search engine, but you may find you achieve
                 better results in others, like Yandex, Baidu, Bing, and so on, since Google
                 tends to observe copyright infringement and moderates its search output.



46   Chapter 4
         How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

            Another great source of information about a company’s business is
        meta-search engines. Websites like Yippy and Biznar aggregate information
        from a variety of general and specialized search engines, giving a nice over-
        view of the company’s recent activity.

 NOTE   The compilation of resources available at https://osintframework.com/ is a gold-
        mine for any open source intelligence operator. You can easily lose yourself exploring
        and cross-referencing results between the hundreds of reconnaissance tools and apps
        listed there.

            From my initial search, many interesting documents pop out, from
        campaign fund reports mentioning GP to marketing pitches for campaign
        directors. Manually skimming through this data makes it clear that GP’s
        core service is building voter profiles based on multiple data inputs. These
        voter profiles are then studied and fed into an algorithm that decides which
        pitch is most suitable to lock in a voter.


Finding Hidden Relationships
        GP’s algorithms mash the data, that much is clear, but where does the data
        come from? To understand GP, we need to understand its closest partners.
        Whatever company or medium is delivering all this data must be working
        closely with GP. Multiple documents hint to the existence of at least two
        main channels:

        •   Data brokers or data management platforms: Companies that sell data
            gathered from telecom companies, credit card issuers, online stores,
            local businesses, and many more sources.
        •   Research studies and surveys: It seems that GP reaches out to the pop-
            ulation somehow to send out questionnaires and collect opinions.

            Although GP’s main website barely mentions advertising as a way to
        reach the public, PDF documents abound with references to a particular
        advertising platform with tremendous reach, both on social and traditional
        media websites. We could not find a straight link to this advertising platform,
        but thanks to these selfsame social media websites they are so fond of, we
        dig out the retweet shown in Figure 4-2 from Jenny, VP of marketing at GP
        according to her Twitter profile.




        Figure 4-2: A revealing GP retweet




                                                                              Healthy Stalking   47
                     How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

                      The link in the tweet innocuously points to an online advertising
                 agency: MXR Ads. They deliver ads on all kinds of websites, charge per
                 thousand impressions (CPM), and go quietly about their business of
                 increasing the internet’s load time.
                      Short of this excited tweet by Jenny of GP, there is not a single visible
                 link between the two companies; there’s barely even a backlink on Google.
                 So what’s the connection? We quickly solve this mystery by consulting the
                 legal records of the two companies on https://opencorporates.com/, a database
                 of companies worldwide, and an excellent resource for digging out old com-
                 panies’ filings, shareholders lists, related entities, and so on. It turns out
                 that MXR Ads and Gretsch Politico share most of the same directors and
                 officers—hell, they even shared the same address a couple of years back.
                      This kind of intertwined connection can be very profitable for both
                 companies: MXR Ads gathers raw data about people’s engagement with a
                 type of product or brand. They know, for example, that the person bearing
                 the cookie 83bdfd57a5e likes guns and hunting. They transfer this raw data
                 to Gretsch Politico, who analyzes it and groups it into a data segment of sim-
                 ilar profiles labeled “people who like guns.” GP can then design creatives
                 and videos to convince the population labeled “people who like guns” that
                 their right to gun ownership is threatened unless they vote for the right can-
                 didate. GP’s client, who is running for office in some capacity, is pleased and
                 starts dreaming about champagne bubble baths at the Capitol, while GP
                 pushes these ads on every media platform with a functioning website. Of
                 course, MXR Ads receives its share of creatives to distribute on its network
                 as well, thus completing the self-feeding ouroboros of profit and despera-
                 tion. Chilling.
                      From this close connection we can reasonably suspect that pwning
                 either MXR Ads or GP could prove fatal to both companies. Their sharing
                 of data implies some link or connection that we can exploit to bounce from
                 one to the other. Our potential attack surface just expanded.
                      Now that we have a first, though very speculative, knowledge of the
                 company’s modus operandi, we can set out to answer some interesting
                 questions:

                 •     How precise are these data segments? Are they casting a large net tar-
                       geting, say, all 18- to 50-year-olds, or can they drill down to a person’s
                       most intimate habits?
                 •     Who are GP’s clients? Not the pretty ponies they advertise on their
                       slides, like health organizations trying to spread vaccines, but the ugly
                       toads they bury in their databases.
                 •     And finally, what do these creatives and ads look like? It might seem
                       like a trivial question, but since they’re supposedly customized to each
                       target population, it is hard to have any level of transparency and
                       accountability.

       NOTE      Zeynep Tufekci has a great TED talk called “We’re building a dystopia just to make
                 people click on ads,” about the dystopian reality encouraged by online ads.


48   Chapter 4
         How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

             In the next few chapters we’ll attempt to answer these questions. The
        agenda is pretty ambitious, so I hope you are as excited as I am to dive into
        this strange world of data harvesting and deceit.


Scouring Github
        A recurrent leitmotif in almost every presentation of Gretsch Politico and
        MXR Ads’ methodology is their investment in research and design and
        their proprietary machine learning algorithms. Such technology-oriented
        companies will likely have some source code published on public reposito-
        ries for various purposes, such as minor contributions to the open source
        world used as bait to fish for talent, partial documentation of some API,
        code samples, and so on. We might just find some material that contains
        an overlooked password or sensitive link to their management platform.
        Fingers crossed!
             Searching public repositories on GitHub is rather easy; you don’t even
        need to register a free account. Simply proceed to look for keywords like
        “Gretsch Politico” and “MXR Ads.” We search for MXR Ads’ repository,
        shown in Figure 4-3.




        Figure 4-3: The MXR Ads GitHub repository

             A single company with 159 public repositories? That seems like a lot.
        After a cursory inspection, it’s clear only half a dozen of these repos actu-
        ally belong to either MXR Ads or one of their employees. The rest are
        simply forks (copied repositories) that happen to mention MXR Ads—for
        instance, in ad-blocking lists. These forked repositories provide little to no
        value, so we’ll focus on those half a dozen original repos. Luckily, GitHub
        offers some patterns to weed out unwanted output. Using the two search
        prefixes org: and repo:, we can limit the scope of the results to the handful
        of accounts and repositories we decide are relevant.
             We start looking for hardcoded secrets, like SQL passwords, AWS access
        keys, Google Cloud private keys, API tokens, and test accounts on the com-
        pany’s advertising platform. Basically, we want anything that might grant us
        our first beloved access.
             We enter these queries in the GitHub search and see what we get:

        # Sample of GitHub queries

        org:mxrAds   password
        org:mxrAds   aws_secret_access_key
        org:mxrAds   aws_key

                                                                              Healthy Stalking   49
                  How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

                 org:mxrAds   BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY
                 org:mxrAds   BEGIN OPENSSH PRIVATE KEY
                 org:mxrAds   secret_key
                 org:mxrAds   hooks.slack.com/services
                 org:mxrAds   sshpass -p
                 org:mxrAds   sq0csp
                 org:mxrAds   apps.googleusercontent.com
                 org:mxrAds   extension:pem key

                      The annoying limitation of GitHub’s search API is that it filters out spe-
                 cial characters. When we search for “aws_secret_access_key,” GitHub will
                 return any piece of code matching any of the four individual words (aws,
                 secret, access, or key). This is probably the only time I sincerely miss regular
                 expressions.

       NOTE      The GitHub alternative Bitbucket does not provide a similar search bar. They even
                 specifically instruct search engines to skip over URLs containing code changes
                 (known as commits). Not to worry: Yandex.ru has the nasty habit of disregard-
                 ing these rules and will gladly show you every master tree and commit history on
                 Bitbucket public repos using something like site:bitbucket.org inurl:master.

                       Keep in mind that this phase of the recon is not only about blindly
                 grabbing dangling passwords; it’s also about discovering URLs, API end-
                 points, and acquainting ourselves with the technological preferences of
                 the two companies. Every team has some dogma about which framework to
                 use and which language to work with. This information might later help us
                 adjust our payloads.
                       Unfortunately, preliminary GitHub search queries did not return any-
                 thing worthy, so we bring out the big guns and bypass GitHub limitations
                 altogether. Since we’re only targeting a few dozen repositories, we’ll down-
                 load the entire repositories to disk to unleash the full wrath of good ol’
                 grep!
                       We’ll start with the very interesting list of hundreds of regex (regular
                 expression) patterns defined in shhgit, a tool specifically designed to look
                 for secrets in GitHub, from regular passwords to API tokens (https://github
                 .com/eth0izzle/shhgit/). The tool itself is also very interesting for defenders, as
                 it flags sensitive data pushed to GitHub by listening for webhook events—a
                 webhook is a call to a URL following a given event. In this case, GitHub sends
                 a POST request to a predefined web page every time a regex matches a
                 string in the code submitted.
                       We rework the list of patterns to make it grep friendly; you can find this
                 list in secret_regex_patterns.txt at https://www.hacklikeapornstar.com/secret_regex
                 _patterns.txt. Then we download all repos:

                 root@Point1:~/# while read p; do \
                 git clone www.github.com/MXRads/$p
                 done <list_repos.txt




50   Chapter 4
                 How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

                     And start the search party:

root@Point1:~/# curl -vs https://gist.github.com/HackLikeAPornstar/
ff2eabaa8e007850acc158ea3495e95f > regex_patterns.txt

root@Point1:~/# egrep -Ri -f regex_patterns.txt *

                     This quick-and-dirty command will search through each file in the
                downloaded repositories. However, since we are dealing with Git reposito-
                ries, egrep will omit previous versions of the code that are compressed and
                hidden away in Git’s internal file system structure (.git folder). These old file
                versions are of course the most valuable assets! Think about all the creden-
                tials pushed by mistake or hardcoded in the early phases of a project. The
                famous line “It’s just a temporary fix” has never been more fatal than in a
                versioned repository.
                     The git command provides the necessary tools we’ll use to walk down
                the commit memory lane: git rev-list, git log, git revert, and the most
                relevant to us, git grep. Unlike the regular grep, git grep expects a commit
                ID, which we provide using git rev-list. Chaining the two commands using
                xargs (extended arguments), we can retrieve all commit IDs (all changes
                ever made to the repo) and search each one for interesting patterns using
                git grep:

root@Point1:~/# git rev-list --all | xargs git grep "BEGIN [EC|RSA|DSA|OPENSSH] PRIVATE KEY"

                     We could also have automated this search using a bash loop or com-
                pletely relied on a tool like GitLeaks (https://github.com/zricethezav/gitleaks/)
                or truffleHog (https://github.com/dxa4481/truffleHog/) that takes care of sift-
                ing through all commit files.
                     After a couple of hours of twisting that public source code in every
                fashion possible, one thing becomes clear: there seems to be no hardcoded
                credentials anywhere. Not even a fake dummy test or test account to boost
                our enthusiasm. Either MXR Ads and GP are good at concealment or we
                are just not that lucky. No matter, we’ll move on!
                     One feature of GitHub that most people tend to overlook is the ability
                to share snippets of code on gist.github.co, a service also provided by https://
                pastebin.com/. These two websites, and others such as codepen.io, often contain
                pieces of code, database extracts, buckets, configuration files, and anything
                that developers want to exchange in a hurry. We’ll scrape some results from
                these sites using some search engine commands:

                # Documents on gist.github.com
                site:gist.github.com "mxrads.com"

                # Documents on pastebin
                site:pastebin.com "mxrads.com"

                # Documents on justepasteit
                site:justpasteit.com "mxrads.com"



                                                                                      Healthy Stalking   51
                     How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

                 # Documents on pastefs
                 site:pastefs.com "mxrads.com"

                 # Documents on codepen
                 site:codepen.io "mxrads.com"

                       One search yields the result shown in Figure 4-4.




                 Figure 4-4: A snippet of an MXR Ads log file

                     This seems to be an extract of a log file just hanging in a public Gist,
                 available for everyone to see. Isn’t that just lovely? Sadly, no critical informa-
                 tion is immediately available, but we do get these unique URLs:

                 •     format-true-v1.qa.euw1.mxrads.com
                 •     dash-v3-beta.gretschpolitico.com
                 •     www.surveysandstats.com/9df6c8db758b35fa0f1d73. . .

                     We test these in a browser. The first link times out, and the second one
                 redirects to a Google authentication page (see Figure 4-5).




                 Figure 4-5: Gretsch Politico sign-in link found in the log file snippet

                     Gretsch Politico evidently subscribes to Google Workspace (formerly G
                 Suite) apps to manage their corporate emails and likely their user directory
                 and internal documents. We’ll keep that in mind for later when we start
                 scavenging for data.
                     The third URL, pointing to Figure 4-6, is promising.




52   Chapter 4
        How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow




       Figure 4-6: Link to an MXR Ad survey found in the log file snippet

            This must be one of these surveys MXR Ads uses to gather seemingly
       harmless information about people. Attempting to pwn MXR Ads or
       Gretsch Politico through one of their pernicious forms is quite tempting,
       but we are still in the midst of our reconnaissance work, so let’s just note
       this for a later attempt.


Pulling Web Domains
       Passive reconnaissance did not yield us many entry points so far. I believe it’s
       time we seriously started digging up all the domains and subdomains related
       to MXR Ads and Gretsch Politico. I am sure we can find so much more than
       the three measly websites on a forgotten Gist paste. Hopefully we’ll land on a
       forlorn website with a sneaky vulnerability welcoming us inside.
            We’ll begin our search by first checking certificate logs for subdomains.

       From Certificates
       Censys (https://censys.io/) is a tool that routinely scans certificate logs to ingest
       all newly issued TLS certificates, and it’s number one on any pentester’s
       domain discovery tool list. Upon their issuance by a certificate authority, cer-
       tificates are pushed to a central repository called a certificate log. This reposi-
       tory keeps a binary tree of all certificates, where each node is the hash of its
       child nodes, thus guaranteeing the integrity of the entire chain. It’s roughly
       the same principle followed by the Bitcoin blockchain. In theory, all issued
       TLS certificates should be publicly published to detect domain spoofing,
       typo-squatting, homograph attacks, and other mischievous ways to deceive
       and redirect users.
            We can search these certificate logs to eke out any new registrations
       matching certain criteria, like MXR Ads. The ugly side of this beautiful can-
       vas is that all domains and subdomain names are openly accessible online.
       Secret applications with little security hiding behind obscure domains are
       therefore easily exposed. Tools like Censys and Crt.sh explore these certifi-
       cate logs and help speed up subdomain enumeration by at least an order of
       magnitude—a cruel reminder that even the sweetest grapes can hide the
       most bitter seeds. In Figure 4-7 we use Censys to search for subdomains of
       gretschpolitico.com.

                                                                             Healthy Stalking   53
                  How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow




                 Figure 4-7: Looking for subdomains with Censys

                      So much for transparency. It seems that GP did not bother registering
                 subdomain certificates and has instead opted for a wildcard certificate:
                 a generic certificate that matches any subdomain. One certificate to rule
                 them all. Whether this is a brilliant security move or pure laziness, the fact
                 is, we’re no further than the top domain. We try other top-level domains
                 in Censys—gretschpolitico.io, mxrads.tech, mxrads.com¸ gretschpolitico.news, and
                 so forth—but come up equally empty-handed. Our list of domains grew by
                 a whopping big fat zero. . . but do not despair! We have other tricks up our
                 collective sleeves.

       NOTE      Of course, wildcard certificates present another security problem: they are a brazen
                 single point of failure. Should we stumble upon the private key while roaming the
                 company’s network, we could intercept the communication flow of all applications
                 using that same parent domain.


                 By Harvesting the Internet
                 If certificates are not the way to gather subdomains, then maybe the inter-
                 net can lend us a helping hand. Sublist3r is a great and easy-to-use tool that
                 harvests subdomains from various sources: search engines, PassiveDNS,
                 even VirusTotal. First, we fetch the tool from the official repository and
                 install requirements:

                 root@Point1:~/# git clone https://github.com/aboul3la/Sublist3r
                 root@Point1:sub/# python -m pip install -r requirements.txt

                     Then we proceed to search subdomains, as shown in Listing 4-1.

                 root@Point1:~/# python sublist3r.py -d gretschpolitico.com
                 [-] Enumerating subdomains now for gretschpolitico.com
                 [-] Searching now in Baidu..
                 [-] Searching now in Yahoo..
                 [-] Searching now in Netcraft..
                 [-] Searching now in DNSdumpster..
                 --snip--
                 [-] Searching now in ThreatCrowd..
                 [-] Searching now in PassiveDNS..

                 [-] Total Unique Subdomains Found: 12


54   Chapter 4
 How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow
dashboard.gretschpolitico.com
m.gretschpolitico.com
--snip--

Listing 4-1: Enumerating domains with sublist3r

     We’ve found 12 subdomains, so that’s encouraging. I bet we’d have even
more luck with mxrads.com. They are, after all, a media company. However,
it can get boring to use the same tools and methods repeatedly. For the
mrxads.com domain, let’s use a different tool to perform a classic brute-force
attack using well-known subdomain keywords like staging.mxrads.com, help
.mxrads.com, dev.mxrads.com, and so on. There are a few tools we can choose
from for the job.
     Amass (https://github.com/OWASP/Amass/) from the OWASP project is
written in Golang and cleverly uses goroutines to parallelize the load of
DNS queries. Whereas most other Python tools rely on the system’s DNS
resolver to retrieve domains by calling functions like socket.gethostname(),
Amass crafts DNS queries from scratch and sends them to various DNS serv-
ers, thus avoiding the bottleneck caused by using the same local resolver.
However, Amass is bloated with so many other colorful features, like visual-
izations and 3D graphs, that it may feel like wielding a ten-pound hammer
to scratch an itch on your back. Tempting, but there are lighter alternatives.
     A less mediatized yet very powerful tool that I highly recommend is
Fernmelder (https://github.com/stealth/fernmelder/). It’s written in C, is barely
a few hundred lines of code, and is probably the most efficient DNS brute-
forcer I have tried lately. Fernmelder takes two inputs: a list of candidate
DNS names and the IPs of DNS resolvers to use. This is what we’ll use.
     First, we create our list of possible DNS names using some awk magic
applied to a public subdomain wordlist. Daniel Miessler’s SecLists is a good
start for instance: https://github.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/.

root@Point1:~/# awk '{print $1".mxrads.com"}' top-10000.txt > sub_mxrads.txt
root@Point1:~/# head sub_mxrads.txt
test.mxrads.com
demo.mxrads.com
video.mxrads.com
--snip--

Listing 4-2: Creating a list of potential MXR Ads subdomains

    This gives us a few thousand potential subdomain candidates to try.
As for the second input, you can borrow the DNS resolvers found at the
Fernmelder repo, shown in Listing 4-3.

root@Point1:~/# git clone https://github.com/stealth/fernmelder
root@Point1:~fern/# make

root@Point1:~fer/# cat sub_mxr.txt | ./fernmelder -4 -N 1.1.1.1 \
-N 8.8.8.8 \
-N 64.6.64.6 \
-N 77.88.8.8 \
-N 74.82.42.42 \

                                                                      Healthy Stalking   55
                  How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

                 -N 1.0.0.1 \
                 -N 8.8.4.4 \
                 -N 9.9.9.10 \
                 -N 64.6.65.6 \
                 -N 77.88.8.1 \
                 -A

                 Listing 4-3: Resolving our subdomain candidates to see which are real

                      Be careful adding new resolvers, as some servers tend to play dirty and
                 will return a default IP when resolving a nonexistent domain rather than
                 the standard NXDOMAIN reply. The -A option at the end of the command hides
                 any unsuccessful domain resolution attempts.
                      Results from Listing 4-3 start pouring in impressively fast. Of the thou-
                 sand subdomains we tried resolving, a few dozen responded with valid IP
                 addresses:

                 Subdomain            TTL Class Type        Rdata
                 electron.mxrads.net.    60 IN       A          18.189.47.103
                 cti.mxrads.net.         60 IN       A          18.189.39.101
                 maestro.mxrads.net.     42 IN       A          35.194.3.51
                 files.mxrads.net.       5   IN      A          205.251.246.98
                 staging3.mxrads.net.    60 IN       A          10.12.88.32
                 git.mxrads.net.         60 IN       A          54.241.52.191
                 errors.mxrads.net.      59 IN       A          54.241.134.189
                 jira.mxrads.net.        43 IN       A          54.232.12.89
                 --snip--

                     Watching these IP addresses roll on the screen is mesmerizing. Each
                 entry is a door waiting to be subtly engineered or forcefully raided to
                 grant us access. This is why this reconnaissance phase is so important: It
                 affords us the luxury of choice, with over 100 domains belonging to both
                 organizations!

       NOTE      Check out AltDns, an interesting tool that leverages Markov chains to form predict-
                 able subdomain candidates: https://github.com/infosec-au/altdns/.

     Discovering the Web Infrastructure Used
                 The traditional approach to examining these sites would be to run WHOIS
                 queries on these newly found domains, from which we can figure out the IP
                 segment belonging to the company. With that we can scan for open ports in
                 that range using Nmap or Masscan, hoping to land on an unauthenticated
                 database or poorly protected Windows box. We try WHOIS queries on a few
                 subdomains:

                 root@Point1:~/# whois 54.232.12.89
                 NetRange:       54.224.0.0 - 54.239.255.255
                 CIDR:           54.224.0.0/12
                 NetName:        AMAZON-2011L
                 OrgName:        Amazon Technologies Inc.
                 OrgId:          AT-88-Z


56   Chapter 4
         How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow

             However, looking carefully at this list of IP addresses, we quickly real-
        ize that they have nothing to do with Gretsch Politico or MXR Ads. It
        turns out that most of the subdomains we collected are running on AWS
        Infrastructure. This is an important conclusion. Most internet resources on
        AWS, like load balancers, content distribution networks, S3 buckets, and so
        on, regularly rotate their IP addresses.

 NOTE   A content distribution network (CDN) is a set of geographically distributed prox-
        ies that help decrease end-user latency and achieve high availability. They usually
        provide local caching, point users to the closest server, route packets through the fast-
        est path, and other services. Cloudflare, Akamai, AWS CloudFront are some of the
        key players.

            That means that if we feed this list of IPs to Nmap and the port scan
        drags on longer than a couple of hours, the IP’s addresses will have already
        been assigned to another customer and the results will no longer be rel-
        evant. Of course, companies can always attach a fixed IP to a server and
        directly expose their application, but that’s like intentionally dropping an
        iron ball right on your little toe. Nobody is that masochistic.
            Over the last decade, we hackers have gotten into the habit of only
        scanning IP addresses and skipping DNS resolution in order to gain a few
        seconds, but when dealing with a cloud provider, this could prove fatal.
        Instead, we should scan domain names; that way, the name resolution will
        be performed closer to the actual scan to guarantee its integrity.
            That’s what we will do next. We launch a fast Nmap scan on all the
        domain names we’ve gathered so far to look for open ports:

        root@Point1:~/# nmap -F -sV -iL domains.txt -oA fast_results

             We focus on the most common ports using -F, grab the component’s
        version using -sV, and save the results in XML, RAW, and text formats with
        -oA. This scan may take a few minutes, so while waiting for it to finish, we
        turn our attention to the actual content of the hundreds of domains and
        websites we found belonging to MXR Ads and Gretsch Politico.


Resources
        Leaked credentials happen more often than you think, as evidenced by this
        bug report of a researcher finding API tokens in a Starbucks-owned repo:
        https://hackerone.com/reports/716292/.
             Read the quick tutorial at https://juristr.com/blog/2013/04/git-explained/ if
        you’re not familiar with Git’s internals.




                                                                                Healthy Stalking   57
How to Hack Like a Ghost (Sample Chapter) © 01/10/21 by Sparc Flow
