Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger




                                                   1
                         W H Y P E R F O R M TA B L E T O P
                                 E X E RCI S E S?




                          Organizations and individuals performed
                          tabletop exercises well before computers
                        were invented. It isn’t hard to imagine that
                      military generals of the past conducted them
              to discuss hypothetical attacks, troop movements, and
              defenses. More recently, tabletop exercises have pre-
              pared people for pandemics, natural disasters, nuclear
              accidents, oil spills, and other events that require a
              significant response and the coordination of disparate
              resources.
                   Only recently have tabletop exercises expanded to include cybersecu-
              rity events. Broadly, a cybersecurity tabletop exercise is a conversation between
              those responsible for fulfilling a variety of roles during a cybersecurity
              incident. In the exercise, the participants, representing a range of organiza-
              tional interests, walk through a hypothetical scenario and discuss how they
    Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                  would respond to it. With the right planning, cybersecurity tabletop exer-
                  cises can be an effective, engaging, and relatively low-­cost way to prepare an
                  organization’s information assurance program for the inevitable cybersecu-
                  rity incident. In this chapter, we consider why an organization might choose
                  to conduct a tabletop exercise, how it can benefit from doing so, and what
                  advantages these exercises have over other approaches.


    Reasons to Conduct a Tabletop Exercise
                  The benefits of a tabletop exercise to an organization’s security culture and
                  business can vary based on its maturity. This section outlines possible ben-
                  efits, ranging from small to significant.

                  Improve Incident Response Team Collaboration
                  All incident response teams have to start somewhere. Some organizations
                  conduct tabletop exercises merely to assemble team members in one room
                  so they can get to know each other, discuss their individual interests, and
                  forge relationships. Here are a few basic scenarios where this might be
                  the case:
                  •    Because of recent staff turnover, employees are unfamiliar with each
                       other and their roles.
                  •    Due to recently implemented regulatory standards, several people have
                       been newly assigned a role in the incident response process.
                  •    The organization has recently formalized an incident response team,
                       and some people on it have never participated in an incident.
                  •    After a merger or acquisition, groups of employees with different sys-
                       tems and processes must come together to address a cybersecurity
                       incident.
                  •    The increasing complexity of incidents has required nontechnical
                       employees (in fields such as legal, compliance, and human resources)
                       to consider how they would respond to a cybersecurity incident.
                  •    The organization has introduced new technology or business processes
                       that may impact how the team responds to a cybersecurity incident.
                      When stakeholders gather to discuss the incident response process,
                  they can understand their respective priorities, share their plans, and build
                  momentum for future initiatives. In some workplaces, participants may
                  already have strong bonds; however, it’s not uncommon for many to be
                  meeting each other for the first time during the tabletop exercise.

                  Clarify Team Roles and Responsibilities
                  Gone are the days in which a cybersecurity event is a one-­person operation.
                  Today, incident response requires input from various stakeholders from
                  both technical and strategic backgrounds. Consider how many parties may


4   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


              respond in the basic case of an HR employee clicking a phishing email
              attachment that downloads malware:
                   Information security manager  ​  ​Leads the investigatory efforts and
                   reports to management, if necessary
                   Information security analyst  ​  P ​ erforms basic forensic and malware
                   analysis to determine what files were impacted on the HR system
                   Network administrator  ​  ​Examines relevant logs from network ingress
                   and egress points to identify suspicious activity
                   Human resources manager  ​  ​Initiates potential disciplinary actions
                   against the employee who compromised the environment and presum-
                   ably broke a policy
                   Legal  ​  ​Determines whether external notifications to governmental
                   authorities or third-­party entities are required based on the files that
                   were accessed by the malware
                   Risk management  ​  A  ​ ssesses whether the organization must perform
                   corrective actions to protect itself in the future
                   Chief information security officer (CISO) ​  N  ​ otifies the organization’s
                   C level, provides status reports, and gives a final disposition; conveys
                   the incident’s impact on the organization’s priorities
                   With so many people involved in the response, it’s important that
              everyone understands their specific roles and responsibilities from the
              first moments of an event to avoid wasting precious time determining
              who should do what. This involves adhering to the chain of command
              and established communication protocols. Tabletop exercises provide an
              environment that allows the team to clarify who is part of the response
              process and what their responsibilities are.

              Assess the Impact of Process Changes
              All organizations, from nonprofits to tech companies, evolve for a mul-
              titude of reasons: laws and regulations are introduced or amended; new
              competitors emerge; tools and techniques are developed. It’s important to
              consider the impact of these changes on the organization’s overall risk.
                  Tabletop exercises are an excellent opportunity to explore process
              changes and their potential impact on incident response. Some of these
              process changes may be mundane; for example, after implementing a
              new ticketing system, the incident response team should verify that the
              help desk can identify a cybersecurity incident and promptly escalate the
              incident ticket to the right person. Other process changes may be larger
              in scale, such as the acquisition of a new business unit, in which case the
              incident response team should ensure its response process aligns with the
              workings of the new business unit.
                  After a process change, an organization could use a tabletop to
              explore unexpected impacts on the incident response team’s ability to
              perform its duties or to confirm that the change does not affect its inci-
              dent response process.

                                                                           Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   5
    Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                       Finally, for the forward-­thinking organization, a tabletop exercise can
                  explore the effect of a proposed process change before it is implemented.
                  Discovering a potentially unwanted impact early enables the organization
                  to make changes before implementing the new process, when alterations
                  are less costly.



                                  CA SE S T UDY: RESPONDING TO NE W L AW S

                       Neptune Pharma, a pharmaceutical manufacturer based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
                       performed its manufacturing in Barbados, where 150 of its employees were based.
                       In 2019, in response to Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
                       Barbados passed the Data Protection Act, which regulates the collection, processing,
                       and dissemination of personal data.
                            Due to its business interests in Barbados, Neptune Pharma had tracked
                       the new legislation and adjusted company policies to comply with it. Now the
                       company’s CISO was requesting a tabletop exercise with information security
                       personnel and legal counsels in both the United States and Barbados. While
                       the CISO didn’t have specific cause for concern, he knew from experience that
                       data privacy legislation had the potential to impact incident response efforts.
                            Worried about corporate espionage, Neptune Pharma focused the table-
                       top on an insider threat scenario; the company manufactured drugs that repre-
                       sented decades of research and large financial investments, which could all be
                       compromised with a simple $100,000 bribe to the right employee. The tabletop
                       exercise scenario was relatively simple: Neptune Pharma believed an employee
                       was selling sensitive pharmaceutical products to a foreign competitor.
                            During the tabletop, the corporate security team said they wanted to inves-
                       tigate the suspected employee’s work computer and mobile phone by shipping
                       the devices to their corporate headquarters in the United States. Shipping
                       devices was standard practice, as the forensic lab was located in Pittsburgh.
                       But the Barbadian legal counsel brought up concerns: if the devices contained
                       employee personal data (including salary information), sending the devices
                       outside Barbados would violate the new Data Protection Act.
                            The tabletop exercise had discovered a gap in Neptune Pharma’s incident
                       response process. While the company would have probably implemented a
                       workaround during an incident, such as sending Neptune Pharma’s corporate
                       investigators to Barbados to perform the analysis, it could now remedy the issue
                       well before any incident occurred.




                  Reduce the Cost of Data Breaches
                  Gaining management support for information security initiatives often
                  requires connecting the initiative to business considerations. Fortunately,
                  there is quantifiable financial value in performing a tabletop exercise; in



6   Chapter 1
    Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                  their Cost of a Data Breach reports, the Ponemon Institute and IBM Security
                  have consistently demonstrated that incident response exercises provide sig-
                  nificant savings in the case of a data breach, as shown in Table 1-1.

                  Table 1-1: Average Cost of a Data Breach in Millions
                    Type of security              Cost of breach with a           Cost of breach with a
                    preparation                   high level of preparation       low level of preparation
                    DevSecOps                              $3.54                             $5.22
                    Incident response plan                 $3.62                             $5.11
                    and testing
                    Employee training                      $3.68                             $5.18
                  Source: Ponemon Institute and IBM Security, Cost of a Data Breach Report 2023
                  (Armonk, NY: IBM Corporation, 2023).

                       The 2023 report found that having an incident response plan and test-
                  ing it regularly is the second most impactful cost mitigator of 28 studied
                  factors. The difference can be staggering: organizations with high levels
                  of incident response planning and testing have an average breach cost of
                  $3.62 million, compared to $5.11 million for those with little to none.
                       Furthermore, organizations that test their incident response plans ben-
                  efit from being able to identify and contain an incident faster—­and thus get
                  back to business more quickly—­than those that do not (Table 1-2).

Table 1-2: Time Needed to Identify and Contain a Data Breach
 Maturity level                              Mean time to identify    Mean time to contain          Total time
 Organization has no incident response              216 days                  90 days               306 days
 team and has not conducted incident
 response plan testing
 Organization has an incident                       208 days                  80 days               288 days
 response team
 Organization has conducted incident                196 days                  62 days               258 days
 response plan testing
 Organization has an incident response              194 days                  58 days               252 days
 team and has conducted incident
 response plan testing
Source: Ponemon Institute and IBM Security, Cost of a Data Breach Report 2023 (Armonk, NY: IBM
Corporation, 2023).

                       Organizations that test their incident response plan have a mean time
                  to identify of 196 days and a mean time to contain of 62 days, which is faster
                  than organizations that just have an incident response team.
                       Note that the 2023 report focuses on data breaches in which data was
                  lost or stolen, which are just a subset of cybersecurity incidents. Furthermore,
                  the data combines incident response planning and testing, and the organiza-
                  tion could have used various testing methods; for example, it may have lever-
                  aged hands-on adversarial testing teams (so-­called red teams) or performed


                                                                                Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   7
    Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                  less intensive tabletop exercises. Even so, the findings suggest that a table-
                  top exercise (one form of testing) can act as a mitigating control, decreas-
                  ing the overall financial impact of a breach on the organization.

                  Improve Security Awareness
                  All employees should be able to identify a threat and escalate it to the
                  proper channels. There are many ways to develop a culture of security
                  awareness across a workforce, ranging from mundane to creative. A cli-
                  ent once told us, “My best investment in information security? It’s most
                  certainly not a fancy tool. I have a line item in my budget that, every year,
                  I need to fight to keep in: $10,000 for gift cards to the coffee shop in the
                  lobby.” Whenever a team member did something right, whether it was keep-
                  ing their desk clean at night, asking a tailgater at the entrance to scan their
                  badge, or properly responding to a phishing email, the client dropped a
                  $10 gift card on the team member’s desk with a note thanking them for
                  their action. The team member typically proceeded to gleefully tell col-
                  leagues about the gift card, amplifying the effect of the initiative.
                       Tabletop exercises are another method to increase security awareness
                  in the organization. Attendees can learn how to identify a threat and take a
                  desired action (such as notifying the information security manager). They
                  can also learn the implications of not taking the correct action, which is
                  particularly valuable for participants coming from outside the cybersecu-
                  rity realm.
                       Tabletop exercises are generally a more engaging form of security
                  training than, say, a prerecorded video (though maybe not as exciting as
                  free coffee!), and they can be tailored to a very specific audience, such
                  as people with important positions at the company or those with a track
                  record of poor security hygiene.



                             CA SE S T UDY: FOS TERING SECURIT Y AWARENESS

                       Pacific Northwest Hospital (PNH) found itself the continual victim of phish-
                       ing attacks. Much to the frustration of its security team, an estimated half of
                       these incidents stemmed from end users clicking links contained in phishing
                       email. The resulting damage ranged from relatively minor issues like streams of
                       pop-up advertisements to more severe situations involving the introduction of
                       ransomware.
                             To tackle the issue, PNH’s risk management team launched a user educa-
                       tion campaign that included training employees, sending them regular test
                       phishing email messages, rewarding them for taking the correct action, and
                       even subjecting them to unorthodox, attention-­getting stunts (like hiring someone
                       to lurk around the lobby wearing an oversized fish costume and handing out
                       business cards reading “Click me”).




8   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger




                         To complement the educational campaign, the information security director
                   conducted two tabletop exercises, one for technical members and another for
                   executive members of the incident response team. Both exercises used phishing
                   as the threat vector. Because the audience was already aware of the perils of
                   phishing, they participated more than usual and didn’t need to be convinced
                   that the scenario was plausible and deserved their attention.
                         If a tabletop exercise had been the only conduit for raising awareness
                   of phishing email, PNH might have had limited success in changing its dismal
                   phishing numbers. But in concert with other awareness efforts, the tabletop
                   exercise solidified participants’ understanding of the risk.




              Explore Key Questions
              During a cybersecurity incident, the organization will inevitably be faced
              with key questions at various points throughout the incident response pro-
              cess. Some of these questions are trivial, while others may have an outsized
              impact on the organization’s ability to respond. A tabletop exercise enables
              a group to discuss and iron out questions like the following outside an
              emergency situation:
              •    Who needs to be involved in the process?
              •    Who needs to be notified, internally and externally?
              •    What do we need to add or change in the incident response plan or
                   playbooks?
              •    What are our weakest links?
              •    When do regulators or cyber insurance carriers need to be notified?
              •    Do contractual obligations require us to notify other business entities?
              •    When do we need to escalate the incident?
              •    Where is the critical data and system?


              Prepare Senior Leadership for an Incident
              Today, senior leadership and the board of directors are often asking if an
              organization is ready for a cybersecurity incident. One of the most signifi-
              cant reasons for this is the increased attention from regulatory authorities,
              especially those overseeing publicly traded entities. Guidance from the
              US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which regulates publicly
              traded companies in the United States, encourages public disclosures
              detailing the risks of cybersecurity incidents.
                  Keeping investors informed of cybersecurity risks is now a standard dis-
              closure data point in a Form 10-­K , an annual report required by the SEC to
              provide insight into the organization’s finances. The majority of the board



                                                                           Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   9
     Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                   of directors must sign 10-­K reports, and senior leadership plays a significant
                   role in preparing their documentation. In a 2018 study titled “Examining
                   Cybersecurity Risk Reporting on US SEC Form 10-­K” (https://www.isaca.org/
                   resources/isaca-journal/issues/2018/volume-5/examining-cybersecurity-risk-reporting​
                   -on-us-sec-form-10-k), CPA Grace Johnson found that cybersecurity risk
                   was listed in the 10-­K s of all corporations included in her research, more
                   companies were providing cybersecurity risk information, and 40 percent
                   of the risk disclosures were “detailed and specific.”
                        Tabletop exercises are one avenue for ensuring that boards and senior
                   leadership are properly prepared for a cybersecurity incident.

                   Align with Industry Standards
                   Many organizations must follow industry standards and best practices,
                   some of which specifically require testing incident response plans. For
                   some businesses, complying with frameworks is a legal requirement, while
                   others choose to follow them to communicate their commitment to cyber-
                   security. Newer organizations might aspire to meet these standards as
                   they grow and mature. In each case, aligning organizational information
                   security initiatives with standards ensures that they are grounded in a solid
                   foundation.
                       The International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the National
                   Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Center for Internet
                   Security (CIS), and the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement
                   (DFARS) all recommend conducting preparatory activities, such as tabletop
                   exercises:
                   ISO/IEC 27001: Information Security, Cybersecurity, and Privacy Protection—
                   Information Security Management Systems—Requirements
                       ISO/IEC 27001 is a well-­k nown international standard that focuses on
                       information security management. This standard recommends that
                       organizations have a well-­maintained and tested incident response
                       plan; in section A.16, it stipulates that organizations should handle inci-
                       dents consistently and have a process in place by which to learn from
                       incidents. Organizations can rehearse their plans through tabletop
                       exercises to align with ISO/IEC 27001.
                   NIST Special Publication 800-84: Guide to Test, Training, and Exercise
                   Programs for IT Plans and Capabilities
                       For organizations that turn to NIST for guidance, look no further than
                       NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-84. This exceptional publication
                       recommends developing a testing, training, and exercise program and
                       has specific sections that focus on tabletop exercises, functional exer-
                       cises, and tests, all of which help improve the organization’s incident
                       response capabilities. While the remaining chapters of this book will
                       touch on the key concepts of the incident response process, we recom-
                       mend that readers review this publication at https://­csrc​.­nist​.­gov​/­pubs​/­sp​/​
                       800​/­84​/final.


10   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


              Center for Internet Security
                 CIS releases a list of critical security controls that organizations can
                 implement to protect themselves from cyberattacks. Many organiza-
                 tions follow CIS to enhance their security posture. If your organization
                 does so, it would be worth reviewing Control 17 and, more specifically,
                 section 17.7, which recommends that organizations “plan and conduct
                 routine incident response exercises . . . on an annual basis.” While the
                 controls do not specifically indicate that the incident response exercise
                 is a tabletop, CIS has released numerous tabletop exercise templates;
                 search for “tabletop exercises” at https://www.cisecurity.org.
              Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement
                 In 2015, the US Department of Defense (DoD) published DFARS to
                 protect controlled but unclassified information. DFARS is more of a
                 contract requirement than a standard and is required for any organiza-
                 tion that performs business with the DoD. The necessary controls can
                 be found in NIST SP 800-171: Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information
                 in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations. Of note, section 3.6.3 lists tabletop
                 exercises as one means of testing the effectiveness of an organization’s
                 incident response.


              Fulfill Contractual Requirements
              Increasingly, organizations that do business with each other must examine
              how these business interactions impact their overall cybersecurity risk. Often,
              one organization grants another limited access to a system so it can per-
              form some service. For example, a manufacturing organization may give a
              vendor remote access to key manufacturing systems so that the vendor can
              perform software updates on them. Thus, if a threat actor were to compro-
              mise one party in the relationship, the other party that shares system access
              might also be impacted.
                   Because of this risk, organizations may insert language into their con-
              tracts defining minimum information security standards as well as require-
              ments of either party in the event of a security incident. The contract might
              require an organization to perform regular tests of an incident response
              process, including a tabletop exercise. DFARS, mentioned in the previous
              section, is one example of a contractual requirement that organizations
              must adhere to if performing services for the DoD.
                   Another example is the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard
              (PCI-­DSS), an information security standard required by various credit card
              brands. PCI-­DSS requires merchants who process credit cards to adhere to
              a set of information security controls designed to minimize the risk posed
              to the credit card brand. The standard requires that organizations test their
              incident response plan at least annually.
                   The tabletop exercise should not, however, become a “check the box”
              affair item to fulfill a contractual obligation or a regulatory requirement.
              Attendees should all understand that the tabletop exercise is an opportu-
              nity to learn, grow, and prepare for a cybersecurity emergency.

                                                                          Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   11
     Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                   Examine a Recent Cybersecurity Incident
                   A tabletop exercise based on a recent cybersecurity incident may be an
                   extension of the lessons learned stage of the incident response process. This
                   stage can range from hosting an informal discussion to making a formal
                   report and debriefing executive leadership. A tabletop exercise could supple-
                   ment preexisting lessons learned activities and provide value even if per-
                   formed several months after the incident.
                       A “recent cybersecurity incident” doesn’t have to mean a catastrophic
                   event that put the organization into a tailspin. Instead, these examinations
                   could explore a simpler incident, such as a well-­placed spam email that
                   a user clicked, or an employee installing and using nonapproved cloud
                   storage software to save sensitive information, thereby violating the orga-
                   nization’s data practices. These basic incidents may be just as valuable to
                   examine as an incident involving nation-­state actors, silent reconnaissance,
                   or a highly advanced piece of zero-­day malware.
                       Because the organization has more context on how an incident occurred,
                   the exercise facilitator could discuss what prompted the user to install the
                   software in the first place (such as a lack of awareness) or whether current
                   security controls are adequate to detect and prevent a similar incident. Cross-­
                   functional issues, such as the role of the HR or legal teams, are other notable
                   avenues of exploration.
                       Finally, when a tabletop exercise scenario is based on what has actually
                   happened versus what could happen, there’s often a greater level of collabora-
                   tion among participants. They sometimes hesitate to completely buy into a
                   tabletop scenario, thinking, Could this really happen to us?, but a cybersecurity
                   incident that really did occur requires no suspension of disbelief.

                   Identify and Prioritize Risks
                   Organizations might also want to perform tabletop exercises to rehearse
                   various risk scenarios that may affect them. Of course, in order to do so,
                   they must first understand what the top risks are. It’s helpful to have a risk
                   register, a tool that identifies and categorizes each risk to the organization
                   and includes information like type of risk, description, probability, priority,
                   and mitigation response.
                        Included in this risk register should be risks that could affect the
                   confidentiality, availability, or integrity of the organization’s data. These
                   might include ransomware, malware, denial of service, lost or stolen lap-
                   tops, business email compromise, and credential theft, among others. If
                   you’re unsure of the risks affecting your organization, consider networking
                   with industry peers and reviewing current threats to your industry vertical.
                   Risks affecting a health system will be very different from those affecting a
                   manufacturing plant.
                        With risks defined, you can then select one (or more) to focus on dur-
                   ing the tabletop exercise. Approaches to selecting a risk may vary; some
                   teams prioritize the highest risk to the organization, while others spend
                   time exploring unfamiliar threats or risks that represent the technical


12   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


              team’s largest weakness. Next, include the appropriate team members in
              the exercise; we’ll offer guidance on this step in Chapter 2.
                  Tabletop exercises can also uncover new risks to the organization. Any
              new risks should be properly documented, reviewed, and prioritized during
              the evaluation stage of the exercise (discussed in Chapter 5).


Advantages of Tabletops over Other Security Exercises
              Tabletop exercises are just one way to train staff, assess residual risk after
              an incident, and refine processes. An organization could also hire red
              teams to actively probe systems for vulnerabilities or perform classroom-­
              oriented security awareness training, for example. But tabletop exercises
              do provide a few advantages over other training and testing formats.

              Low Cost and High Return on Investment
              Tabletop exercises are an extremely cost-­effective way to explore an orga-
              nization’s plans, policies, and procedures. Additionally, they ensure that
              employees understand the processes they must follow in the event of a
              cybersecurity incident. Unlike some security exercises (for example, red
              teaming), a tabletop exercise requires no additional equipment beyond the
              standard office suite of tools, a conference room, and a projector. You won’t
              need technical resources the way you would in a hands-on exercise, only
              employees’ time.
                  Even with its low overhead, the return on investment from a tabletop
              exercise can be significant. Consider the value of these lessons learned
              from tabletop exercises:
              •    In discussing a scenario involving the compromise of social media
                   accounts, you discover that the social media accounts followed by thou-
                   sands of customers use a password shared by multiple employees and
                   lack multifactor authentication: two compounding security failures.
              •    During a ransomware-­t hemed tabletop exercise in which the organi-
                   zation decides to pay a ransom, you determine that the organization
                   lacks a method to quickly attain and transfer cryptocurrency. This
                   step alone could add several hours or days to the process, prolonging
                   the incident.
              •    When discussing how the information security team would analyze a
                   suspicious employee’s laptop during an employee misconduct scenario,
                   staff determines that they lack common computer forensic tools needed
                   to preserve the employee’s hard drive.
                  If discovered by a low-­cost tabletop exercise and rectified, each of these
              process deficiencies could mitigate a costly cybersecurity incident or lead to
              a swifter resolution.
                  Finally, high-­quality tabletop exercise templates are increasingly avail-
              able for no cost from a variety of reputable sources. The US-based CISA
              (the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency) is just one of many


                                                                          Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   13
     Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                   sources that provide free tabletop exercise templates for organizations wish-
                   ing to conduct their own internal tabletop exercises (https://­www​.­cisa​.­gov​/­cisa​
                   -­tabletop​-­exercise​- packages). We discuss other sources in Chapter 3.

                   Efficiency
                   Tabletop exercises offer an additional perk: they let you discuss an inci-
                   dent, from identification to remediation, in a matter of hours. By contrast,
                   operations-­based exercises require staff to respond to activities in real
                   time, such as by performing containment measures (like severing net-
                   work connectivity) and conducting analysis (like investigating logs and
                   artifacts).
                        According to the European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (better
                   known as ENISA), it takes approximately 206 days to detect a data breach.
                   (You can find its report, titled “ENISA Threat Landscape 2020 -­Data
                   Breach,” at https://­w ww​.­enisa​.­europa​.­eu​/­publications​/­enisa​-­threat​-­landscape​
                   -­2020 ​- ­data​- ­breach​.) This is in line with the Ponemon Institute and IBM
                   Security’s finding that, in 2023, it took an average of 204 days to identify a
                   data breach and another 73 days to contain it. A tabletop exercise takes an
                   event that would normally require significant time to identify—­and even
                   more time to resolve—­and compresses the discussion down to a few hours.
                   When a discussion point is brought up that may require hours or days of
                   work, the facilitator of the exercise can artificially “move the clock ahead”
                   and provide the next block of information to consider, filling in any infor-
                   mation gaps. We discuss these strategies further in Chapter 3.
                        Tabletop exercises are a compromise to balance the time an employee
                   spends preparing for events and performing their primary job. Requiring
                   key personnel to plan an operations-­based exercise and then devote one or
                   more working days to play out the response may not be tenable for many
                   organizations.

                   No Operational Disruption
                   Every business has information systems that are key to its operations—­for
                   example, medical equipment that monitors patient health, manufactur-
                   ing equipment whose downtime would result in significant financial loss,
                   and operational technology that controls banks of elevators in a high-­r ise
                   building.
                        An obvious benefit of tabletop exercises is that they don’t require inter-
                   acting with critical systems in a way that could impact human safety or cause
                   serious financial harm to the organization. On the other hand, even very
                   basic operations-­based exercises would involve interacting with critical
                   information systems. In some cases, this might be too risky or downright
                   irresponsible.
                        Tabletop exercises enable experts on critical systems to discuss hypo-
                   thetical cybersecurity incidents without actually interacting with those
                   systems. This discussion allows them to better identify weaknesses that may
                   cause a cybersecurity incident, potential containment and analysis strate-
                   gies, and the implications of an incident.

14   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                                      CA SE S T UDY: SAFELY TES TING
                                        MANUFAC T URING S YS TEMS

                   The new director of information security at Pacific Baby Formula, a nutrition
                   company that makes infant formulas, wanted to test the organization’s ability to
                   respond to a security event involving its manufacturing systems. However, the
                   chief risk officer informed him that they couldn’t perform penetration tests on the
                   manufacturing lines due to strict quality controls and safety concerns.
                        He struck a compromise: instead of actively testing the manufacturing
                   infrastructure, he used a tabletop exercise to explore how a cybersecurity
                   incident involving those systems might play out. The premise of the exercise
                   was that a contractor had accidentally introduced malware into the environ-
                   ment while servicing those systems. The malware, which was nothing more than
                   a cryptocurrency miner, impacted multiple manufacturing systems by consum-
                   ing processing power. To contain the incident, parts of the manufacturing pipe-
                   line were shut down.
                        The tabletop exercise revealed several deficiencies in the company’s ability
                   to identify and respond to a cybersecurity incident:

                   •    Several operational technology devices weren’t monitored for potentially
                        malicious software.
                   •    IT contractors regularly updated the software for certain specialty manu-
                        facturing equipment, and the process of verifying IT contractors’ software
                        patches had gaps that would have allowed malicious software to enter the
                        environment.
                   •    The team maintaining the manufacturing plant operations would not have
                        notified the information security team in a timely manner because the
                        teams had different standards for what constituted a security incident.
                   •    If impacted by malware, certain manufacturing systems would have taken
                        days to service, creating an unacceptable period of downtime.

                          Each of these issues had the potential to cause a cybersecurity incident or
                   stifle its response; if combined, they could be catastrophic. Even without hands-
                   on testing, the tabletop yielded significant findings.




What Tabletop Exercises Can Test
              Because tabletop exercises require minimal infrastructure, there are few
              limitations to what they can test. In discussion-­based exercises, you might
              begin by focusing on technical controls, only for other issues (such as prob-
              lems with a vendor contract) to emerge as a focal point. Even so, organiza-
              tions often find it beneficial to narrow their focus by digging deep into one
              topic or focusing on organizational goals (such as reducing risk to a critical
              system). This section will review a number of common focus areas.



                                                                            Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   15
     Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                   The Potential Impact of Current Threats
                   You can use tabletop exercises to continually explore the cybersecurity
                   threat landscape and how it applies to your organization. It’s no secret that
                   the threat landscape evolves frequently—­consider just a few events over the
                   past several decades:
                   The Morris Worm (1988)
                      This self-­replicating piece of code created by Robert Morris caused the
                      early internet to come crashing to a halt, highlighting the vulnerabili-
                      ties of information systems.
                   Distributed denial- ­of- ­service (DDoS) attacks (2000)
                       Fifteen-­year-­old Michael Calce managed to take several websites offline,
                       including Yahoo!, Amazon​.­com, and eBay, causing cyberattacks to enter
                       the mainstream conversation.
                   Stuxnet (2010)
                       This worm, which targeted Iranian centrifuges responsible for enrich-
                       ing uranium, was believed to be a cyberweapon for possible use in a
                       nuclear attack.
                   The Shamoon virus (2012)
                      Designed to cause destruction in victim networks by erasing operating
                      systems, this virus greatly impacted Saudi Arabia’s state-­owned oil com-
                      pany, Saudi Aramco.
                   Sony Pictures’ film The Interview (2014)
                      Angered by this film’s portrayal of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un,
                      the North Korea–­connected hacker group Guardians of Peace attacked
                      Sony, stealing and then releasing significant personal information and
                      intellectual property in an attempt to harm the company.
                   Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack (2021)
                      This event shut down Colonial Pipeline, which transports almost half
                      the fuel on the East Coast of the United States, causing widespread fuel
                      shortages. Ransomware is the number one threat identified by ENISA
                      for that reporting period and has been a significant concern for the
                      better part of a decade.
                   Casino hacks (2023)
                      This series of cyberattacks leveraged social engineering and other tech-
                      niques to cause havoc for the Caesars and MGM casinos. According to
                      an MGM Resorts International regulatory filing, it caused an approxi-
                      mate loss of $100 million due to interruptions in revenue, remediation
                      efforts, and other factors.
                       As highlighted in these examples, the threat landscape has evolved
                   from relatively simple attacks impacting availability to more purposeful
                   attacks aimed at stealing intellectual property or for financial gain. Threat


16   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


              landscapes change because threat actors—­whether individuals, groups, or
              nation-­states—­have unique motivations that also evolve. Factors completely
              independent of traditional cybersecurity, such as the emergence of new
              attack vectors or geopolitical issues, can also change the threat landscape,
              as was the case during the COVID-19 pandemic when many workforces
              adjusted to working from home.
                   By performing exercises that take into account the current threat land-
              scape or plausible hypothetical scenarios, organizations can assess whether
              they have properly prioritized their security investments. For example, an
              organization involved in critical infrastructure (such as water and elec-
              tric distribution) would take particular interest in the Colonial Pipeline
              attack, knowing that attackers recently targeted critical infrastructure. Also,
              because organizations can perform simplified tabletop exercises on an ad
              hoc basis with minimal planning, they can relatively easily tailor an exercise
              topic to a recent news event to assess its impact on the organization.



                                  CA SE S T UDY: AN AD HOC RESPONSE
                                             TO CURRENT E V ENT S

                   Canadian Shield Bank, a regional financial institution in Ontario, Canada,
                   became aware of a spike in smishing attacks targeting the banking industry.
                   Smishing is a type of phishing attack that attempts to trick mobile phone users
                   into clicking links sent via SMS. A regional competitor had reported a large
                   number of these texts, which claimed that the victims’ checking accounts were
                   overdrawn and prompted them to click a link to avoid overdraft fees.
                        To supplement its mandated yearly tabletop exercises, Canadian Shield
                   Bank ran an ad hoc tabletop: a quick one-­hour discussion over lunch to play
                   out how such an attack would impact the company and what response steps
                   might be required. By all accounts, the tabletop exercise succeeded: Canadian
                   Shield Bank identified a number of process improvements and gaps it had not
                   previously considered, as this was the first time its region had seen such attacks.
                   For example, participants realized they didn’t have a method to quickly warn
                   bank customers via the bank app or text messaging.
                        Going forward, the bank began performing short quarterly tabletop exer-
                   cises based on changes to the threat landscape and within one week of a unique
                   threat popping up on its radar. Because the tabletop exercise scenarios weren’t
                   based on a hypothetical “what if?” and took few creative liberties, participants
                   were far more likely to think critically about how the incident would play out at
                   the company.




              The Sufficiency of the Information Security Budget
              When information security teams want to implement a certain technology,
              develop a product, or add head count to the team, they usually must make


                                                                            Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   17
     Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                   a business case for the added cost. One way to use tabletop exercises is to
                   explore an already known risk in an effort to raise awareness of it and form
                   a coalition that supports dedicating resources to mitigating it.
                        For example, if an information security manager recognizes that the
                   current budget to maintain and store logs is inadequate, the tabletop can
                   weave in a component that highlights the logging deficiency and its poten-
                   tial impact on a cybersecurity incident. This strategy may work best if the
                   exercise uses an external facilitator to point out the deficiency, as the infor-
                   mation security manager may be perceived as biased.
                        Tabletop exercises are an excellent way to highlight current gaps in the
                   environment because they are flexible and can be built around a known
                   deficiency. The exercise provides a forum for the information security team
                   to demonstrate why an investment is needed and what the costs of inaction
                   would be.

                   Information Sharing Protocols for IoCs
                   When responding to an event, the team might want or feel obligated to
                   share indicators of compromise (IoCs) with other entities. IoCs are artifacts
                   unique to the cybersecurity incident that are identified on devices in the
                   organization’s network and, if observed elsewhere (either internally or in
                   another organization), may indicate the further spread of a cybersecurity
                   incident. IoCs could include firewall logs showing that a system beaconed
                   out to a suspicious network address, unique registry changes on an operat-
                   ing system, or characteristics of possible malicious files.
                         IoCs are extremely valuable, as they may be the first digital breadcrumbs
                   available to identify how far an incident has spread. Some organizations are
                   contractually obligated to share these details, or they may do so for altruistic
                   reasons to allow potentially affected entities to bolster their own defenses
                   against a mutual cyber adversary.
                         Tabletop exercises are an excellent way to discuss how to share infor-
                   mation with outside parties. During your exercise, consider exploring
                   the following questions from the Microsoft publication “A Framework
                   for Cybersecurity Information Sharing and Risk Reduction” (https://­www​
                   .­microsoft​.­com​/­en​- ­us​/­download​/­details​.­aspx​?­id​= 45516) when confronting the
                   topic of information sharing:
                   •    Who should share information?
                   •    What should be shared?
                   •    When should it be shared?
                   •    What is the quality and utility of what is shared?
                   •    How should it be shared?
                   •    Why is it being shared?
                   •    What can be done with the information?
                       Organizations should consider well in advance the nuances of sharing
                   information, such as maintaining confidentiality, while also balancing the
                   interests of other internal stakeholders, particularly the legal team.

18   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


              Gaps in the Incident Response Plan
              One of the most crucial parts of effective incident response is the incident
              response plan. Computer Security Incident Handling Guide (NIST SP 800-61r2)
              provides excellent guidance on what should be included in this plan.
              One critical component is a charter, which defines what an incident is and
              includes the mission statement, goals and objectives, and authority of the
              team. The plan should also define the members of the incident response
              team, their roles and responsibilities, and the incident severity levels set
              by the organization. It should spell out an organized incident response
              approach and communication protocols.
                   In addition, the plan should designate a specific person to oversee test-
              ing (to avoid the diffusion of responsibility) and define a testing frequency;
              at a minimum, the plan should be tested once a year, and ideally twice a
              year. Testing the plan using an exercise allows the team to collaborate in
              an organized manner to resolve the incident, learn from one another, and
              potentially find gaps in the plan itself.
                   Even in the best-­w ritten incident response plan, tabletop exercises often
              uncover areas for improvement. Take time during the tabletop to document
              these gaps so the plan can be updated accordingly. You want to find the
              weaknesses during these exercises—­not in the heat of a real incident.

              The Efficacy of Processes and Procedures
              Some organizations have predefined plans to respond to specific types
              of cybersecurity incidents. In addition to the incident response plan, you
              might want to validate the following:
              •    Playbooks that address a certain type of cybersecurity event or incident,
                   such as ransomware; these playbooks provide in-­depth guidance and
                   thus require investments to keep up to date
              •    Incident escalation paths, which ensure that relevant members of tech-
                   nical and strategic teams are notified at the appropriate time via a pre-
                   defined communications channel
              •    Incident identification and notification procedures, which help the
                   organization identify an incident at all levels and notify relevant parties
              •    Containment procedures, which dictate how to execute containment
                   efforts in tandem with business continuity plans
              •    External party notifications, such as required communications to gov-
                   ernment entities
                   A tabletop exercise doesn’t necessarily need to validate all processes
              and procedures. Instead, it could home in on a single item of concern, such
              as a recently updated process or a change to the organization that has the
              potential to impact incident response efforts.




                                                                          Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   19
     Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


                   Compliance with Notification Requirements
                   Of particular salience, a tabletop provides a low-­stress environment to evalu-
                   ate the requirements related to notifying external parties. You’ve likely had
                   the unpleasant experience of receiving a data breach notification letter from
                   a financial institution, healthcare provider, or other business. That organiza-
                   tion probably sent the letter to comply with a breach notification obligation.
                        Since the early 2000s, laws have imposed specific requirements for
                   notifying consumers of the loss of protected data. In the United States,
                   California pioneered data breach notification laws in 2002, and all 50 states
                   now have their own variations. In the European Union, the GDPR legislation
                   codifies, among other things, data breach notification rules. Other countries
                   have followed suit, including Australia, China, and even Barbados (as noted
                   earlier in the chapter).
                        However, each data breach law defines sensitive data sets differently
                   and outlines its own notification process. Perhaps most importantly, some
                   define slightly different temporal requirements and thresholds at which a
                   notification is required. For example, one data breach law may require noti-
                   fication to an authority within 72 hours of a suspected compromise of a data
                   set, while another may allow seven business days for a confirmed compromise.
                        These data breach laws can quickly become cumbersome in even a
                   simple cybersecurity incident. Consider the fictitious Executive Travel
                   Experience (ETE), a publicly traded travel agency whose client list repre-
                   sents citizens from almost every US state, most Canadian provinces, several
                   European countries, and a few Middle Eastern and Southeast Asian coun-
                   tries. Say ETE’s information security team believes the threat actors may
                   have had access to client data as well as employee data, including health
                   plan information. ETE’s employee base is mostly located in Chicago but has
                   strategic account managers throughout the world.
                        Addressing the legal component of this relatively common scenario can
                   become a beast in itself. ETE’s legal team needs to consider, at a minimum:
                   •    The nuances of data breach laws relating to almost every US state,
                        Canadian province, and other impacted countries
                   •    Notification requirements for each customer whose data was stolen
                   •    In cases when the data involved was owned by a vendor and ETE had
                        contractual requirements to safeguard it, whether ETE must notify the
                        vendor
                   •    Because ETE’s health plan information was likely accessed, whether
                        ETE must notify the US Department of Health and Human Services,
                        which administers the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
                        Act (HIPAA)
                   •    Whether the incident meets materiality, thus requiring ETE—as a pub-
                        licly traded US company—to file SEC Form 8-­K to notify investors
                       In addition, for each of these questions, ETE must consider temporal
                   requirements for performing the notification. As you can see, a cybersecurity



20   Chapter 1
Cybersecurity Tabletop Exercises (Sample Chapter) © 8/5/24 by Robert Lelewski and John Hollenberger


              incident could easily balloon into a myriad of downstream tasks. A tabletop
              exercise allows you to identify and explore these tasks in a low-­stress setting.
                  Business contracts with other organizations might also outline notifica-
              tion requirements. For example, they may stipulate that you must issue a
              notification if a specific data set is lost. Finally, consider whether you have
              an ethical or moral responsibility to notify impacted individuals or orga-
              nizations, even if the incident doesn’t meet a legislative or contractual bar.
              While these ethical guidelines are less black-­and-­white than legal require-
              ments, organizations should still assess them when determining whom to
              notify during a tabletop exercise.

              Residual Risk After Corrective Actions
              After most cybersecurity incidents, an organization will examine the factors
              that caused or contributed to the incident, such as a failure of technical
              controls, policies, or end user education. Once it identifies these factors,
              the organization may make changes or technology investments to reduce
              the risk of recurrence. At this stage, performing a tabletop exercise can
              enable stakeholders to run through a similar cybersecurity incident and dis-
              cuss those corrective measures. This step functions as an additional check
              to identify residual risk as well as another opportunity to fully assess the
              downstream impact of any changes.


Summary
              In this chapter, we’ve discussed many of the common reasons organizations
              choose to perform tabletop exercises. Tabletops have quantifiable benefits,
              such as monetary savings during a data breach, as well as more qualitative
              ones, such as improved relationships among response team members. Your
              organization may want to perform a tabletop exercise for reasons that aren’t
              listed in this chapter, but what matters most is that you understand and
              align with its goals when starting your tabletop exercise journey.


Questions
              As you begin planning an upcoming tabletop exercise, take the time to con-
              template the following questions (some may have readily apparent answers,
              while others may require investigation):

                1. In performing a tabletop exercise, are there specific conditions (such as
                   contractual or regulatory requirements) you must meet?
                2. What are the intended primary and ancillary benefits of performing a
                   tabletop exercise in your organization?
                3. What lessons would you like to learn by performing a tabletop exercise?
                4. What people, process, or technology factors would you like the tabletop
                   exercise to test?


                                                                          Why Perform Tabletop Exercises?   21
