       The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26




  SUPERVISED FINE-TUNING: THE
                                   3
     FOUNDATION TECHNIQUE



            “If intelligence is a cake,” Yann LeCun said
           during his famous presentation almost a
          decade ago at NIPS (as NeurIPS was then
       known), “the bulk of the cake is unsupervised
learning, the icing on the cake is supervised learning,
and the cherry on the cake is reinforcement learning.”
While the exact proportions have been hotly debated
(indeed, most of the deliciousness of the current AI
cake comes from the icing and the cherry), the senti-
ment remains true—supervised fine-tuning (SFT) re-
mains the workhorse of post-training LLMs . It is the
most widely used technique, the one with the broad-
est applicability, and often the only one necessary to
achieve satisfactory results.
     The apparent simplicity of SFT conceals substantial depth. The mechan-
ics of optimization, the geometry of loss landscapes, and above all the art
of data curation determine whether a fine-tuning effort succeeds or fails.
                        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                 Practitioners who understand these foundations can diagnose problems that
                 would mystify those who treat fine-tuning as a black box. Data quality mat-
                 ters more than model size, more than hyperparameter tuning, more than
                 training compute. A thousand carefully curated examples will outperform
                 10,000 mediocre ones because the model learns from what you show it, and
                 showing it the wrong thing—even if technically correct—teaches the wrong
                 lesson.
                      This chapter develops SFT from first principles: the causal language
                 modeling objective, gradient-based optimization, and the constraints of
                 batch size and memory. We explore data curation strategies, including syn-
                 thetic data generation, instruction backtranslation, and quality verification.
                 We examine training dynamics: how to read loss curves, when to stop train-
                 ing, and how to verify that models learned what you intended rather than
                 surface patterns. We address infrastructure requirements, distributed train-
                 ing approaches, and cost estimation. Finally, we develop criteria for when
                 SFT suffices and when RL becomes necessary.


     The Mechanics Under the Icing
                 The causal language modeling loss, gradient-based optimization, and the
                 constraints of batch size and memory are foundations that are worth under-
                 standing precisely, because this knowledge enables intelligent debugging
                 when training goes awry.


                 Learning by Predicting the Next Token
                 SFT is one of those concepts that appears almost trivial, yet its fundamen-
                 tal importance to post-training means we cannot gloss over its details. SFT
                 not only does much of the heavy lifting in practice but also is foundational
                 to later, more complex techniques—not in a methodological but a practical
                 sense. Often enough, SFT in and of itself is sufficient, but the reverse is al-
                 most never true: Jumping to RL without SFT is guaranteed to end in tears
                 and/or wasted GPU time.
                      The pre-trained model already “knows” language. It can generate fluent
                 text, follow grammatical rules, and draw on vast knowledge encoded during
                 pre-training. But it lacks the specific behavior you want: answering ques-
                 tions in a particular format, adopting a certain tone, or following domain-
                 specific conventions. SFT bridges this gap by showing the model examples
                 of correct behavior—pairs of inputs and desired outputs—and adjusting the
                 model’s weights so that, given those inputs, the model assigns higher prob-
                 ability to those outputs. The model learns by example, and the examples
                 define what correct means (hence supervised). This is why data quality mat-
                 ters so profoundly: The model can learn only behaviors that the training
                 data demonstrates—and it will learn whatever behaviors the data contains,
                 whether you intended them or not.
                      The model processes tokens x1 , x2 , . . . , xt–1 and produces a probabil-
                 ity distribution over the vocabulary for what xt should be. Training adjusts


68   Chapter 3
                  The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

          weights to make this distribution assign higher probability to the actual next
          token and lower probability to alternatives. Repeat for every position in ev-
          ery training sequence, and the model learns to generate text that resembles
          the training data.
               This “teacher forcing” paradigm—always conditioning on ground truth
          tokens rather than the model’s own predictions—enables efficient training
          through parallelization. Every position in a sequence can be processed si-
          multaneously, since each position sees the true preceding tokens rather than
          waiting for the model to generate them. The efficiency gain is enormous, as
          what would otherwise require sequential generation becomes a single paral-
          lelized forward pass. The price of this efficiency is, of course, that we aren’t
          really training in the same conditions as our model will be called upon to
          inhabit at the time of inference. In inference, a model does have to condi-
          tion on its own imperfect outputs, which result in the compounding errors
          so familiar to users of autoregressive LLMs. The model has never practiced
          recovering from its own mistakes, because training never exposed it to them.

WARNING   Causal, which has a somewhat specific meaning in language modeling, refers to be-
          ing directionally limited. An event in the present cannot cause an event in the past.
          In the same vein, a token at a position cannot influence tokens that came before it.
          Therefore, in a causal model, a token can attend to only previous tokens and not
          future ones. Contrast this with masked language modeling, used, for example, in
          BERT-style models, where tokens can attend in whichever direction they wish. Do
          not, however, allow the language to lead you to believe that some sort of cause-and-
          effect relationship is involved here.
               As we know from supervised learning in general, we need a metric of
          just how far off we are from the desired results. The standard loss function
          for causal language modeling is cross-entropy, which measures how well the
          model’s predicted probability distribution matches the actual next token.
          Cross-entropy earned this role because it directly optimizes what we care
          about: making the model assign high probability to correct continuations.
          Other loss functions do exist, but cross-entropy’s combination of theoretical
          soundness (being the maximum likelihood estimator) and practical effective-
          ness has made it ubiquitous.
               Understanding this loss mathematically matters because it helps you
          interpret the loss curve, your key indicator of the training process’s overall
          health. Practitioners have a somewhat unhelpful tendency to consider the
          loss curve and ignore its values. This is good enough for the most part, be-
          cause what we care about, first and foremost, is the loss curve going the right
          way (which at least for SFT is down). However, understanding what it means
          when “loss: 2.3” drops to “loss: 1.8,” does confer a deeper understanding.
          For this, we must understand how cross-entropy loss is calculated. For a se-
          quence of tokens x1 , . . . , xT , it takes the form

                                           1∑
                                               T
                                L(θ) = –      log pθ (xt | x1 , . . . , xt–1 )
                                           T
                                              t=1


                                                            Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   69
                        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                 where pθ denotes the model’s predicted probability distribution over the
                 vocabulary. The negative log probability has an intuitive interpretation: At
                 a loss of 2.3, our model assigns a – log–1 (2.3) ≈ 0.1 probability to the cor-
                 rect token on average, while at a loss of 1.8, it assigns – log–1 (1.8) ≈ 0.165
                 probability. In short, that drop from 2.3 to 1.8 means the model has become
                 about 65 percent more confident in its prediction of the correct token. In-
                 cidentally, these numbers connect directly to perplexity (the exponentiated
                 loss), which we explore in Chapter 6.
                      For fine-tuning specifically, the loss is typically computed on only re-
                 sponse tokens, not prompt tokens. The model should learn to generate ap-
                 propriate responses, not to predict the prompt (which is provided at infer-
                 ence time). This “completion-only” loss focuses learning signal on the be-
                 havior we want to optimize, ignoring the prompt tokens that merely provide
                 context.


                 Nudging the Model in the Right Direction
                 The loss function tells us how wrong the model is but not how to fix it. That
                 is the optimizer’s job. An optimizer takes the gradient of the loss with respect
                 to each parameter—a vector pointing in the direction of steepest increase—
                 and updates the parameters in the opposite direction, nudging the model
                 toward lower loss. Repeat this process over thousands of batches, and the
                 model gradually improves. The choice of optimizer determines how these
                 updates are computed: how large each step ought to be, whether to treat all
                 parameters equally, and how to handle the noisy gradients that arise from
                 training on small batches rather than the full dataset.
                      The de facto default optimizer for language model fine-tuning is AdamW.72
                 It’s useful to understand what it does, because that understanding is essential
                 to identifying those rare instances when other optimizers are a better choice.
                 AdamW is a per parameter adaptive learning rate optimizer. It scales up-
                 dates inversely with the historical magnitude of gradients. Parameters that
                 have received large gradients get smaller updates, while parameters that have
                 received small gradients get larger ones. This adaptivity helps navigate loss
                 landscapes where different parameters operate at different scales, a common
                 situation in deep networks with varied layer structures.
                      The W in AdamW denotes decoupled weight decay, a refinement that
                 separates regularization from gradient-based updates. Standard L2 regular-
                 ization adds a penalty proportional to weight magnitude to the loss function,
                 which then affects gradients, while weight decay directly shrinks weights to-
                 ward 0, independent of the loss gradient. The decoupling matters because
                 it enables the regularization to function properly regardless of learning rate
                 schedule and empirically produces better generalization for language models.
                      Optimization is conditioned by hyperparameters, the most important by
                 far being the learning rate. The optimal value for fine-tuning differs dramat-
                 ically from pre-training. Pre-training starts from random initialization and
                 can use learning rates on the order of 10–4 to 10–3 . Fine-tuning, as the name
                 suggests, starts from a carefully trained model that must not be disrupted,


70   Chapter 3
       The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

typically requiring learning rates of 10–6 to 10–5 . Too high a learning rate
during fine-tuning causes the model to “forget” pre-training, losing gen-
eral capabilities while pursuing the fine-tuning objective. Too low a learn-
ing rate, on the other hand, means the model never adapts meaningfully to
the fine-tuning data. Learning rate schedules—starting lower and warming
up, or starting higher and decaying—can help navigate this sensitivity. My
favorite, which happens to also be the most widely adopted, is cosine decay
with warm-up, which eases down after an initial ramp (warm-up).
     How do we pick the ideal values for our hyperparameters? Some, of
course, are conditioned by our environment (we can push the batch size
only so high before the GPU decides that it’s too big of a bite to chew). For
others, practitioners used to rely on guesswork and experience.
     Fortunately, we now have hyperparameter optimization (HPO) frame-
works like Optuna that use Bayesian optimization to efficiently explore the
hyperparameter space, learning from each trial to focus subsequent trials
on promising regions.73 For learning rate specifically, Optuna can search
across several orders of magnitude, evaluating each candidate on a shortened
training run before committing to full training with the best-performing
value. This approach extends naturally to other hyperparameters (weight
decay, warm-up steps, batch size) and can optimize them jointly rather than
independently.
     The compute cost of hyperparameter search is real, but negligible com-
pared to that of even a single failed training run. I have more than once seen
teams waste weeks of GPU time on training runs premised on well-meant
but incorrect hyperparameters—effort that a six-hour focused run of Op-
tuna, with Hydra as the configuration manager, readily averted in subse-
quent runs.


        VIBE CHECK: HYPERPARAMETER OPTIMIZATION
                      WITH OPTUNA

    Coding agents like Claude Code and Codex are good at much more than writing
    code—for example, coordinating complex tasks and workflows. While watching
    hyperparameter searches converge is fascinating the first few times, it gets old
    rather quickly. Agents, on the other hand, can tirelessly babysit HPO runs.
    The hpo-optuna agentskill in the agentskills folder of the book’s companion
    repository implements this functionality. Not only does it help set up and run
    Optuna studies, but it also monitors their progress, summarizes results, and
    suggests next steps. You can even ask it to generate visualizations of the search
    process. This offloads the tedium of HPO management to an agent, freeing you
    to focus on higher-level strategy and analysis.
    The skill integrates with Weights & Biases as well as Trackio, an open source
    alternative developed by the Hugging Face team. Especially if you’re training
    on Hugging Face’s serverless Jobs interface, it has become popular to use
    ephemeral Hugging Face private repos as interim storage for experiment
    artifacts, then spin up a Hugging Face Space to visualize it with Trackio.




                                                 Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   71
                         The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                      Learning rates have an interesting effect that is sometimes neglected. At
                 times, a cascade of multiple SFT runs is necessary to achieve the desired re-
                 sult. This is typically the case when you need both a broader capability (such
                 as answering MCQ-style questions) and a specific, narrow capability (for ex-
                 ample, doing so in the biomedical domain). In such cases, it pays to consider
                 adapting relative learning rates so that the narrower capability is learned
                 at a lower learning rate, typically at least one order of magnitude less than
                 the broader. This protects the broader capability from being inadvertently
                 forgotten while the narrower is being learned. Or, to use the loss landscape
                 geometry we explored in Chapter 2, reducing the learning rate helps ensure
                 that the model remains in the basin of attraction of the broader capability
                 while finding its optimum with respect to the narrower one.


                 Understanding Batch Size: More Than a Memory Constraint
                 Batch size occupies a peculiar position in the hyperparameter hierarchy.
                 Those who read tutorials aimed mainly at hobbyists could be forgiven for
                 thinking that batch size is primarily the result of memory constraints. This
                 is true, as reducing batch size is one of the trade-offs available to users with
                 limited VRAM. But there’s more to batch size than memory economy.
                      Larger batch sizes produce more accurate gradient estimates by averag-
                 ing over more examples, reducing the noise inherent in stochastic gradient
                 descent. This stability can accelerate training by enabling larger learning
                 rates and more confident updates. On the other hand, larger batch sizes
                 do have a potential drawback beyond memory: They tend to find “sharper”
                 minima in the loss landscape, which may generalize less accurately to held-
                 out data than the “flatter” minima that smaller, noisier batches discover.74
                      Of course, regardless of resources, VRAM imposes hard constraints on
                 batch size. Each example in a batch requires memory for activations stored
                 during the forward pass (needed for gradient computation during the back-
                 ward pass), and this activation memory often dominates total memory usage
                 during training. A model that fits comfortably in memory with batch size
                 1 may exceed memory with batch size 8, even though the model weights
                 themselves fit easily. The scaling is approximately linear: Doubling batch
                 size approximately doubles activation memory. This is precisely why access
                 to desktop high-VRAM prototyping tools like the NVIDIA DGX Spark is so
                 valuable. They enable experimentation with larger batch sizes that would be
                 infeasible on typical workstations.
                      An elegant work-around to the VRAM problem is gradient accumulation.
                 Instead of processing a large batch in a single forward-backward pass, this
                 technique processes multiple smaller batches, accumulating their gradients
                 before performing a weight update. The mathematical result is identical
                 to a single large batch, as the accumulated gradients equal the gradient of
                 the combined examples. Effective batch sizes far larger than memory per-
                 mits thus become achievable at the cost of proportionally more forward-
                 backward passes per weight update. The training dynamics of batch size 32



72   Chapter 3
        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

via four steps of accumulation with batch size 8 closely match those of native
batch size 32.
     A common misconception holds that batch sizes have to be powers of two.
They do not. The mathematics of gradient descent is indifferent to whether
you train with batch size 32 or 37. GPU hardware historically achieved better
utilization with power-of-two tensor dimensions, but modern hardware and
frameworks handle arbitrary sizes efficiently. That said, there are practical
reasons to prefer “round” numbers.
     Evaluation and test set sizes that divide evenly by batch size ensure that
every example is seen exactly once per evaluation pass, avoiding the com-
plexity of partial batches. When using gradient accumulation, the per device
batch size multiplied by the accumulation steps should yield your target ef-
fective batch size, so if you want an effective batch size of 32 with four accu-
mulation steps, you need a per device batch size of 8. Distributed training
adds another constraint: The global batch size equals the per device batch
size times the accumulation steps times the number of devices, so all three
must align. TRL and the Hugging Face Trainer will warn you if your dataset
size is not divisible by the global batch size, since the final incomplete batch
can cause subtle reproducibility issues. None of this requires powers of two
specifically, but it does reward choosing batch sizes with convenient factors.


Using Sequence Packing for Efficiency
Most fine-tuning datasets contain examples of varying length. A customer
service dataset might include brief clarification questions alongside detailed
troubleshooting conversations. Without special handling, each training
example occupies a fixed sequence length, with shorter examples padded
to match the longest. This padding wastes compute: The model processes
padding tokens that contribute nothing to learning.
    Sequence packing addresses this inefficiency by concatenating multiple
short examples into a single sequence, separated by end-of-sequence tokens.
A batch that would contain eight examples with 50 percent average padding
can instead pack those eight examples into four sequences with minimal
padding, halving compute while processing the same data. The efficiency
gains are substantial for datasets with high length variance, where short ex-
amples would otherwise waste considerable compute on padding.
    The implementation requires attention masking to prevent examples
from attending to one another within a packed sequence. Without proper
masking, the model might learn spurious correlations between adjacent ex-
amples that happen to share a packed sequence. Modern training frame-
works like TRL’s SFTTrainer implement packing correctly, automatically han-
dling the attention mask when packing is enabled.75 The practitioner need
only set a configuration flag.
    Packing interacts with loss computation in ways that merit attention.
When examples vary dramatically in length, the short examples contribute
fewer tokens to the loss than long examples, even when both represent equally
important training signal. Some implementations weight loss by example


                                                Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   73
                         The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                 rather than by token to address this imbalance, though the default token-level
                 weighting works well for most use cases. The choice depends on whether you
                 believe each example or each token should contribute equally to learning.


     Garbage In, Garbage Out
                 If there is one message to take from this chapter, it is this: Data quality mat-
                 ters more than anything else. Neither model size, nor hyperparameter tun-
                 ing, nor training compute have as much of an impact on the overall outcome
                 as data quality. You cannot out-algorithm poor inputs.


                 Understanding That Less Is More (When It Is Better)
                 But what exactly is high-quality data? Quality in this context means more
                 than mere correctness, though correctness is necessary. Quality means ap-
                 propriateness: examples that demonstrate precisely the behavior you want,
                 in the format you need, at the difficulty level that characterizes your deploy-
                 ment scenario.
                      A dataset of a thousand examples that perfectly capture your use case
                 will outperform one with 10 thousand examples that are merely related.
                 This is especially true for SFT, where the model can learn only differences
                 that the training data more or less directly captures. As a consequence, the
                 data curation process must have some level of intentionality. This is one as-
                 pect in which post-training large models is rather different from classical
                 statistical sampling. We are not necessarily looking for representative sam-
                 ples of reality, but for something that is good enough for the model to learn
                 that reality from.
                      Sampling therefore does not have to be as assiduously unbiased as is
                 expected in more traditional ML contexts. What matters, however, is expo-
                 sure. What a model is exposed to during training is what it learns, and the
                 absence of meaningful exposure does deprive the model of that opportu-
                 nity. It is not uncommon to need only a few examples of fairly distinctive
                 content to convey its signal and meaning to the model during SFT, while
                 more subtle information may require more exposure.


                                           WHEN SCALE OBSCURES

                     Legendary teams start with a hundred solid examples, while novice teams start
                     with a million and wonder why everything is confusing. The model learns from
                     what you show it, and showing it the wrong thing—even if that thing is technically
                     correct—teaches the wrong lesson.
                     This is, incidentally, how slop (low-quality, generic model output) happens. Mod-
                     els trained on oceans of mediocre content learn to produce mediocre content at
                     scale, with all the hallmarks of quantity without quality: verbose, generic, indis-
                     tinguishable from a thousand other outputs. When scale makes assessing data
                     quality difficult, it goes from ally to enemy.




74   Chapter 3
        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26



    When a model keeps failing at the SFT stage or begins to exhibit unexpected and
    undesirable behaviors, it may be helpful to resort to a time-tested approach: or-
    dering as much pizza as can be delivered safely, then manually sifting through
    the dataset to curate a small, super-high-quality subset, even if it is just a few
    hundred examples. This is sufficient to establish what good data looks like. And
    often enough, that’s all the model needs to start learning the right behavior. It can
    then be boosted with additional data from the original set.


     Consider a practical example. An organization wants to fine-tune a
model for customer service responses. It has access to two datasets: 10,000
historical email exchanges between agents and customers, and a thousand
carefully curated examples written by its best agents following its latest style
guidelines. The historical data is “real” but contains inconsistent formatting,
outdated information, and the full spectrum of agent quality. The curated
data is “artificial” but precisely represents desired behavior.
     The curated data will almost certainly produce better results, because
the model learns what it sees, and the curated data shows what the organi-
zation wants. At this point, it is worth once again reiterating that this is not
statistical sampling, where we want to know what reality is like. Data is not
our guide; it is our tool to shape the model’s behavior. We are perfectly free
to be as opinionated as we desire in our selection of samples to achieve that
objective.


                 THE BABY BASELINE METHODOLOGY

    Before investing in sophisticated training runs, establish what the Hugging Face
    team calls baby baselines.76 The process is simple: Train an absurdly simple
    model first, over a small set (maybe 100 examples), fine-tune for a single epoch,
    and evaluate. This is not meant to produce a good model. It is meant to verify that
    your pipeline works, your data is formatted correctly, and your evaluation harness
    produces sensible numbers.
    The next step is vibe testing. Before running formal evaluations, look at outputs.
    Generate responses to 20 prompts you care about and read them. Does the
    model sound right? Does it follow the format you expect? This informal check
    often reveals problems that metrics miss: subtle format errors, tone mismatches,
    or capabilities that work but feel wrong. Only after vibe testing confirms that the
    model is directionally correct should you run expensive formal evaluations.
    This methodology saves enormous amounts of wasted compute. I’ve seen teams
    run week-long training jobs before discovering their chat template was wrong.
    I’ve seen teams celebrate benchmark improvements while their model’s actual
    outputs degraded in ways the benchmarks could not detect. Baby baselines and
    vibe testing aren’t exactly the peak of sophistication and sound statistical meth-
    odology, but they do grant an early insight into the training process that, most
    importantly, reflects much of the subjective experience that SFT (and post-training
    in general) is meant to inculcate in the model.




                                                   Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   75
                         The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                 Speaking the Model’s Language
                 For the success of SFT, the format in which training data is presented mat-
                 ters as much as its content. Modern instruction-tuned models expect con-
                 versations structured in particular ways: special tokens that delimit speaker
                 turns, system messages that establish context, specific patterns that signal
                 the end of assistant responses. A model trained on data formatted one way
                 will behave unpredictably when prompted with data formatted another way,
                 even if the semantic content is identical. Format mismatch is one of the
                 most common causes of fine-tuning failure and one of the easiest to prevent.
                      Chat templates provide the solution. A chat template is a specification of
                 exactly how to convert a structured conversation—a list of turns with roles
                 and content—into the token sequence the model expects. Different model
                 families use different templates. Llama models expect certain control to-
                 kens, Mistral models expect others, and ChatML provides yet another for-
                 mat. By far the easiest way around this somewhat confusing landscape is
                 using the Tokenizers class in Transformers, which is exposed throughout the
                 Hugging Face ecosystem’s packages. This class comes with a set of the most
                 commonly used chat templates, which can be extended using Jinja, a fairly
                 well-known templating syntax. Chat templates help with automatic conver-
                 sion from structured data to properly formatted sequences.
                      Beyond the mechanical question of correct tokenization, format consis-
                 tency provides semantic benefits. When the model sees consistent format-
                 ting during training, it learns not just what to say but when and how to say it.
                 Consistent use of system messages teaches the model to attend to system in-
                 structions, and consistent response formatting teaches the model appropri-
                 ate output structure. Variation in training format creates uncertainty about
                 what the model should produce. The goal is to make deployment conditions
                 identical to training conditions, and format consistency is the foundation of
                 that identity.


                      CHAT TEMPLATE FORMATS ACROSS MODEL FAMILIES

                     Different model families expect different chat templates. The following examples
                     are illustrative. Specific tokens and formatting evolve with model versions, so
                     always verify against your model’s tokenizer rather than copying these
                     verbatim.

                     ChatML Format (Used by Many OpenAI-Style Models)

                     <|im_start|>system
                     You are a helpful assistant.<|im_end|>
                     <|im_start|>user
                     What is the capital of France?<|im_end|>
                     <|im_start|>assistant
                     The capital of France is Paris.<|im_end|>




76   Chapter 3
        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26



    Llama 3/4 Format

    <|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|>

    You are a helpful assistant.<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>

    What is the capital of France?<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant
    <|end_header_id|>

    The capital of France is Paris.<|eot_id|>


    In practice, rely on the tokenizer’s apply_chat_template method rather than
    constructing these formats manually. This ensures that you match the exact
    tokens the model was trained to expect.



Cleaning House Before Training
Duplicate examples in training data produce models that memorize spe-
cific phrasings rather than learning general patterns. If the same example
appears 10 times in the dataset, the model receives 10 times the gradient
signal for that exact phrasing compared to unique examples. The model
learns that precise wording very well indeed and generalizes poorly beyond
it. Even two or three copies of an example can produce measurable memo-
rization effects, and datasets assembled from multiple sources often contain
far more duplication.
     Note that this point is somewhat distinct from the equally true assertion
that models aren’t necessarily sensitive to the relative weight of a type, class,
or category of examples in the training data vis-a-vis others. Here, the issue
is specifically with the multiplicity of identical or near-identical instances
that encourage memorization, rather than relative overweight or under-
weight of a particular class of examples that would not.
     Deduplication methods exist on a spectrum, between exact and com-
putationally inexpensive on one end and semantically accurate but com-
putationally typically much more intensive on the other. Exact deduplica-
tion catches only identical examples, yet from an SFT perspective, near-
duplicates cause similar problems. Two customer service call transcripts
that differ only in the customer’s name teach the same lesson and should
contribute almost the same gradient signal, but without deduplication they
contribute doubly.
     Fuzzy matching techniques identify near-duplicates despite superficial
differences. MinHash efficiently estimates Jaccard similarity between text
documents,77 SimHash creates compact fingerprints that can be compared
for similarity,78 and embedding-based methods measure semantic similar-
ity that catches paraphrases. Embedding-based methods are especially use-
ful in domain-specific contexts, as these may be able to resolve identities
that are not syntactically apparent (for example, macrophage activation syn-
drome, cytokine release syndrome, and cytokine storm denote vaguely the same

                                                 Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   77
                         The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                 pathological entity, but only highly domain-specific embeddings would be
                 able to make this association). A proper deduplication pipeline combines a
                 cascade of these techniques for efficient yet comprehensive deduplication.
                      Contamination checking addresses a related but distinct concern: overlap
                 between training data and evaluation data. If the model has seen evaluation
                 examples during training, evaluation scores cease to measure generalization
                 and instead measure memorization; in short, they cease to be meaningful.
                 This contamination can be accidental (when training and evaluation data
                 derive from similar sources) or can arise from data processing errors. Before
                 training, the responsible practitioner verifies that no training examples
                 appear in evaluation sets, and ideally checks for near-duplicates as well. The
                 validation that seems to confirm success may be confirming only that the
                 model memorized the test.


                 Transforming Raw Material into Training Data
                 The data that trains the model must come from somewhere, and that some-
                 where determines the ceiling on model quality. Three broad strategies exist
                 for generating training data: expert annotation (domain specialists create ex-
                 amples), trained annotator annotation (workers without prior domain exper-
                 tise are taught the task), and synthetic generation (models create examples that
                 humans or other models then verify). Each strategy has its place, and most
                 successful projects combine them.
                      Expert annotation produces the highest quality but at significant cost.
                 A physician writing medical consultation examples brings clinical judgment
                 that no annotation guideline can replicate, and a lawyer writing legal anal-
                 ysis brings professional expertise that takes years to develop. Yet experts
                 are expensive, their time is limited, and annotation may not be the best use
                 of their expertise. Expert annotation typically works best for creating gold-
                 standard seed sets—a few hundred examples that establish the quality bar
                 and calibrate subsequent annotation efforts. These seed examples then de-
                 fine what good looks like for trained annotators or synthetic generation.
                      Trained annotators offer a middle path: better economics than experts,
                 better quality than purely synthetic generation. The key is selection and
                 training. Annotators should demonstrate capacity to learn the task, even
                 if they lack prior domain knowledge. Training should include calibration
                 against expert examples, ongoing feedback as they produce annotations,
                 and quality control mechanisms that catch errors before they propagate.
                 The investment in annotator development compounds, and a skilled anno-
                 tation team becomes an organizational asset that produces high-quality data
                 across multiple projects.




78   Chapter 3
        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26


                 BUILDING ANNOTATION CAPABILITY

    The best annotation teams I’ve worked with were not hired but grown. Start with
    people who can write clearly and follow complex instructions, then invest heavily
    in their domain education. Weekly calibration sessions for discussing borderline
    cases builds shared judgment. A feedback loop that enables annotators to see
    how models trained on their data perform can create ownership and motivation.
    After six months, a well-developed annotation team can produce data that rivals
    expert annotation—at a fraction of the cost.
    Most importantly, treat your annotators well. Not only are they producing the data
    that makes your models work, but they are also your first line of defense against
    data quality issues. Empower them to raise concerns, suggest improvements, and
    take pride in their work. More than once, I’ve seen enterprises bitterly regret
    alienating their annotators by treating them like low-skilled, disposable labor. Not
    only is this unethical and unfair, given their paramount importance to building
    quality models, it is also a very expensive mistake in the long run.




Generating Synthetic Training Data
Human data generation is, of course, subject to limitations of scale and cost.
Synthetic generation is much less constrained and thus has emerged as an
attractive option. A capable model can generate thousands of examples in
the time a human produces one, but those examples may contain errors, bi-
ases, or subtle failures that a human would avoid. Verification therefore be-
comes essential for filtering synthetic examples to acceptable quality, accept-
ing those that pass scrutiny and discarding those that don’t. The efficiency
of synthetic generation depends on the pass rate: If most generated exam-
ples are acceptable, synthetic generation is efficient, but if most are rejected,
the approach may collapse to human input with extra steps.
     The research literature on synthetic data has matured considerably, and
we now have a well-characterized set of strategies to choose from depending
on the circumstances. The decision of which approach to use depends on
the data you already have, the capabilities you are trying to instill, and the
amount of verification capacity you can deploy. Figure 3-1 summarizes my
(somewhat opinionated) decision framework to guide the choice among syn-
thetic data strategies.




                                                  Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   79
                          The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26


                                                           Need more
                                                          training data




                          Instruction      No             Do we have
                        backtranslation                  labeled data?
                         Li et al. 2023

                                                                 Yes


                              Quality-focused < 1–5k          Data           10K+
                                curation                     volume

                          LIMA (Zhou et al. 2023)

                                                                  No               Need                  Yes
                                                                                reasoning?



                                          New domain                            Tool use
                                                            New tasks                                     Reasoning
                                                                                                          distillation
                                                                                                       Hsieh et al. 2023
                         Small (sub-1B)                  Large (1B+)
                                           Model size
                                                                                     ToolFormer

                                                                                  Schick et al. 2023
                       Curriculum                           Textbook-style
                        learning                              generation               Gorilla

                        TinyStories                     Gunasekar et al. 2023      Patil et al. 2023
                    (Eldan & Li 2023)
                                                                                       ToolLLM

                                                                                   Qin et al. 2023


                                                                                Tool use specialization


                 Figure 3-1: A decision flowchart for synthetic data strategies. The choice depends on
                 existing data availability, target capabilities, and whether the task involves tool or API
                 integration. Dashed arrows indicate progressive scaling of complexity within the tool-use
                 family of approaches.

                 When You Have No Labeled Data
                 In the most constrained situation, you have raw documents or text but no
                 instruction-response pairs. Instruction backtranslation addresses this by
                 inverting the usual generation direction;79 rather than generating responses
                 to prompts, you generate prompts that would elicit existing text as a response.


80   Chapter 3
       The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

     Start with a seed model fine-tuned on a small number of examples, use
it to generate instruction prompts for unlabeled documents, and then filter
the resulting pairs for quality. The model that produced the backtranslations
can itself be used for filtering, creating a self-improving loop. This approach
produced Humpback, which at the time of publication outperformed other
non-distilled models despite being trained on self-generated data.

When Quality Matters More Than Scale
The LIMA paper demonstrated a result that surprised many practitioners:
A 65-billion-parameter model fine-tuned on only 1,000 carefully curated
examples performed comparably to models trained on orders of magnitude
more data.80 The implication is that for many tasks, the quality ceiling is
determined by the best examples in your dataset, not the quantity. If you
have a limited annotation budget, spend it on diversity and quality rather
than scale. Cover the range of behaviors you want the model to exhibit,
ensure that each example is exemplary, and stop when diminishing returns
set in. This quality-focused approach proves especially effective when you
can identify what excellent looks like and can produce or select examples that
achieve it.

Distilling Reasoning from Larger Models
When you have abundant data but want to transfer capabilities from a large
model to a smaller one, distillation offers a powerful path. The standard ap-
proach fine-tunes the smaller model to match the larger model’s outputs,
but Cheng-Yu Hsieh et al. in “Distilling Step-by-Step” demonstrated that ex-
tracting and training on the reasoning process produces better results than
training on outputs alone.81 The larger model generates not just answers
but explanations of how it reached those answers, and the smaller model
learns from both.
      This approach achieved remarkable efficiency. Models that would nor-
mally require orders of magnitude more data matched the performance of
much larger teachers. The key insight is that the reasoning trace contains
information that raw outputs do not, and smaller models can leverage this
information to punch above their weight.

Teaching New Domains Through Curricula
When introducing models to entirely new domains, the structure of train-
ing data matters as much as its content. TinyStories demonstrated that even
very small models can generate coherent text when trained on appropriately
structured synthetic data: short stories using only vocabulary that young
children understand.82 The constrained vocabulary forced the data to ex-
hibit clear narrative structure and logical progression, which the model
learned to reproduce.
     This curriculum approach, using synthetic data designed to teach con-
cepts progressively from simple to complex, proves especially valuable for
domain adaptation. The “Textbooks Are All You Need” paper extended
this insight to code generation, showing that training on textbook-style

                                               Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   81
                         The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                 explanations produced dramatically better results than training on raw
                 code.83 The phi-1 model, trained on synthetic textbooks and exercises,
                 achieved 50 percent on HumanEval with only 1.3 billion parameters, out-
                 performing models many times its size that were trained on vastly more data.

      NOTE       Research has found that synthetic data designed like a textbook (with progressive con-
                 cept building, worked examples, and exercises with solutions) teaches more effectively
                 than raw examples.83 The structure itself conveys information that unstructured
                 data lacks. When generating synthetic training data, consider not just what the data
                 says but how it teaches. Explanations that build on previously established concepts,
                 examples that illustrate principles before requiring their application, and exercises
                 that test understanding all contribute to more efficient learning. This principle ap-
                 plies whether the domain is code, reasoning, or specialized knowledge.

                 Integrating Tools and APIs
                 A distinct family of synthetic data strategies addresses tool use and API in-
                 tegration. Toolformer demonstrated that models can learn to use external
                 tools through self-supervised training;84 the models can generate candidate
                 API calls, execute them, and keep only those that improve predictions. The
                 model learns when to call tools, what arguments to provide, and how to in-
                 corporate results, all without explicit supervision. This approach requires
                 only a handful of demonstrations per tool and scales to new tools with mini-
                 mal additional annotation.
                      When the goal is integration with specific API ecosystems, Gorilla showed
                 that retrieval-aware training dramatically improves accuracy.85 By training on
                 API documentation alongside usage examples and providing documentation
                 at inference time, the model learns to generate correct API calls even for APIs
                 not seen during training. This approach significantly reduced hallucinations
                 compared to models that relied on memorized API knowledge.
                      For complex multistep tool use, ToolLLM introduced depth-first search-
                 based decision trees (DFSDT) to navigate the space of possible API call
                 sequences.86 The resulting dataset covers over 16,000 APIs across 49 cat-
                 egories, with multistep chains that demonstrate how to compose tools for
                 complex tasks. Models trained on this data learn not just individual tool use
                 but the planning required to orchestrate multiple tools toward a goal.
                      The choice of synthetic data strategy depends on your starting point
                 and your destination. Figure 3-1 provides a decision framework. If you lack
                 labeled data entirely, instruction backtranslation bootstraps from raw docu-
                 ments. If you have limited data, quality-focused curation following the LIMA
                 approach maximizes impact. If you have abundant data and want to transfer
                 capabilities to smaller models, distillation captures reasoning that raw out-
                 puts miss.




82   Chapter 3
                  The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

WARNING   Models trained on synthetic data generated by other models risk amplifying whatever
          biases the generator model contains. If the generator produces subtly incorrect reason-
          ing, stereotyped language, or factual errors, the student model learns these patterns
          as if they were correct. Verification becomes essential, and ideally includes checks
          specifically designed to catch the failure modes of the generator model. The efficiency
          of synthetic data makes this verification investment worthwhile, but skipping verifi-
          cation in pursuit of scale produces models that confidently reproduce their teacher’s
          mistakes.
          For new domains, curriculum-style synthetic data teaches more efficiently
          than unstructured examples. And for tool integration, the progression from
          Toolformer through Gorilla to ToolLLM offers increasingly sophisticated
          approaches as your tool ecosystem grows. Chapter 11 discusses synthetic
          data more extensively.


  From Theory to GPU Clusters
          With data prepared and objectives understood, we turn to running training.
          This section traces the path from the basic training loop through monitor-
          ing, infrastructure planning, and distributed training. Understanding what
          happens during training—not just how to configure it—enables informed de-
          bugging when things go wrong.


          Understanding the Training Loop
          Every fine-tuning run, regardless of framework or scale, executes the same
          fundamental loop. Data flows through the model, loss quantifies error, gra-
          dients indicate how to improve, and parameters update accordingly. Under-
          standing this loop demystifies training and grounds discussions of optimiza-
          tion, monitoring, and debugging.
               The loop proceeds in steps (Figure 3-2). Each step processes a batch of
          examples through the forward pass, computing predictions and loss. The
          backward pass then computes gradients—the partial derivative of the loss
          with respect to each parameter, indicating how changes to that parameter
          would affect the loss. The optimizer uses these gradients to update parame-
          ters, nudging them in directions that should reduce loss. After the update,
          the next batch arrives, and the process repeats.




                                                          Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   83
                          The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26



                                                                                Logged     Loss value




                                    Batch                 Forward pass                   Compute loss
                                    (𝑥, 𝑦)                 𝑦̂ = 𝑓𝜃 (𝑥)                     ℒ(𝑦,̂ 𝑦)




                                                             Model 𝜃



                          Zero gradients                 Update params                   Backward pass
                             ∇←0                          𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝜂∇                         ∇𝜃 ℒ


                      Repeat for each batch

                                                                                           Gradients


                 Figure 3-2: The fine-tuning training loop. Each batch flows through the forward pass to
                 compute predictions and loss, then backward through the network to compute gradients.
                 The optimizer updates parameters with the gradients, which are then cleared before the
                 next iteration.

                      Listing 3-1 shows this fine-tuning training loop in practice.

                 for epoch in range(num_epochs):
                     for batch in train_dataloader:
                      ¶ outputs = model(**batch)
                         loss = outputs.loss

                       · loss.backward()

                       ¸ optimizer.step()
                          scheduler.step()

                       ¹ optimizer.zero_grad()
                 Listing 3-1: The essential training loop, stripped to fundamentals

                      In practice, the loop grows more complex:
                     •     Gradient accumulation splits large effective batch sizes across multi-
                           ple forward-backward passes before updating.
                     •     Mixed-precision training maintains some computations in lower
                           precision for speed while keeping critical values in higher precision
                           for stability.
                     •     Gradient clipping caps gradient magnitudes to prevent explosive
                           updates.

84   Chapter 3
          The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

      •    Checkpointing periodically saves state to enable recovery from
           failures.
      •    Logging records metrics for later analysis.
Yet, beneath these elaborations, the fundamental rhythm remains: forward
¶, backward ·, update ¸, repeat ¹. Modern frameworks like Hugging Face’s
Trainer and TRL’s SFTTrainer abstract this loop into configuration, handling
the complexities automatically.
     Listing 3-2 shows a typical SFT configuration.

from trl import SFTTrainer, SFTConfig

config = SFTConfig(
    output_dir="./sft-output",

    ¶ per_device_train_batch_size=2,
      gradient_accumulation_steps=8,

    · learning_rate=2e-5,
    ¸ lr_scheduler_type="cosine",
      warmup_ratio=0.1,

    ¹ num_train_epochs=3,
      max_seq_length=2048,

      logging_steps=10,
      eval_strategy="steps",
      eval_steps=100,

      save_strategy="steps",
      save_steps=500,
      save_total_limit=3,

      bf16=True,
      gradient_checkpointing=True,
)

trainer = SFTTrainer(
    model=model,
    args=config,
    train_dataset=train_data,
    eval_dataset=eval_data,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
)

trainer.train()

Listing 3-2: SFT configuration with TRL’s SFTTrainer


                                                  Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   85
                        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                     This configuration specifies batch size ¶, learning rate ·, schedule ¸,
                 and duration ¹, leaving the framework to manage the loop mechanics.


                 Performing the Hardware Reality Check
                 The infrastructure required for SFT scales with model size, but the scaling is
                 gentler than many practitioners expect. A single GPU with 80GB of memory
                 (an A100 or H100) can fine-tune 7-billion-parameter models with gradient
                 checkpointing and careful batch sizing. The NVIDIA DGX Spark’s generous
                 unified memory can handle much larger models. Parameter-efficient fine-
                 tuning methods like LoRA further reduce requirements, enabling the same
                 model to be fine-tuned on consumer hardware with 24GB of memory.87
                 (We explore these methods in depth in Chapter 7.) The crucial middle does
                 not require the infrastructure of a foundation lab but does require thought-
                 ful resource planning.
                      Memory during training comprises four components: model parame-
                 ters, gradients (the same size as the parameters), optimizer states (typically
                 twice the size of the parameters for Adam), and activations (variable, de-
                 pending on batch size and sequence length). The rule of thumb is that full
                 fine-tuning in float16 or bfloat16 requires approximately 16 bytes per param-
                 eter: 2 for parameters, 2 for gradients, 8 for optimizer states, and variable
                 overhead for activations. A 7-billion-parameter model thus requires roughly
                 112GB for training overhead before accounting for activations, explaining
                 why 80GB GPUs are marginal and why parameter-efficient methods are so
                 popular.
                      The choice between float16 and bfloat16 merits brief attention (bit pre-
                 cision is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7). Both use 16 bits, but they
                 allocate those bits differently. The float16 option dedicates more bits to pre-
                 cision (10 mantissa bits) and fewer to range (5 exponent bits), while bfloat16
                 reverses this trade-off (7 mantissa bits, 8 exponent bits). The practical con-
                 sequence is that bfloat16 matches float32’s dynamic range (it can represent
                 the same extremely large and small values), while float16 cannot. During
                 training, gradients and activations occasionally spike to values that over-
                 flow float16’s range, causing NaN losses and failed training runs. The bfloat16
                 datatype handles these spikes gracefully, making training more stable at the
                 cost of slightly reduced precision that rarely matters in practice. When avail-
                 able (A100, H100, all Blackwell-class GPUs and recent consumer GPUs),
                 bfloat16 is the better default for fine-tuning. Older hardware that supports
                 only float16 requires more careful gradient scaling and may need gradient
                 clipping to avoid instability.


                 Picking Your Weapons
                 The Hugging Face ecosystem has become the de facto standard for fine-
                 tuning work, and this dominance reflects genuine merit.88 Its Transform-
                 ers library provides unified interfaces to most popular model architectures,
                 the Datasets library handles efficient data loading and preprocessing, the


86   Chapter 3
       The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) library implements parameter-
efficient methods like LoRA and QLoRA, the Trainer class abstracts com-
mon training patterns into a configuration-driven interface. Documentation
is extensive, community support is active, and solutions to most problems
can be found through search. Starting elsewhere requires justification.
     Higher-level frameworks like Axolotl and LLaMA-Factory abstract even
further, reducing fine-tuning to configuration files rather than code. These
frameworks are valuable for rapid experimentation, as changing from full
fine-tuning to LoRA becomes a configuration change rather than a code
rewrite. The cost is flexibility. When your requirements diverge from what
the framework anticipated, you must either work around the framework’s
assumptions or descend into its implementation. For standard fine-tuning
tasks, this limitation rarely binds, but for novel requirements, it can become
prohibitive.
     Custom training loops represent the opposite trade-off: maximum flexi-
bility at the cost of development time and expertise. Writing a training loop
from scratch requires understanding gradient computation, memory man-
agement, distributed training, checkpoint handling, and dozens of other
details that frameworks handle automatically. The effort is justified when
frameworks prove inadequate, performance optimization requires low-level
control, or research pushes beyond established patterns. For most enter-
prise fine-tuning projects, custom loops are unnecessary. Start with Hugging
Face Trainer and graduate to custom loops only when Trainer’s limitations
become binding. Even then, consider whether modifying Trainer through
callbacks and subclassing might suffice.


         HIGHER-LEVEL ABSTRACTIONS: UNSLOTH AND
                        AXOLOTL

    Two tools have emerged as particularly valuable for practitioners who want
    more than the basic Trainer but less than a custom loop.6, 7 Understanding how
    they relate to the broader ecosystem helps in choosing when to use them.
    The Hugging Face stack comprises several layers. At the bottom, Accelerate
    handles device placement, mixed precision, and distributed training—the
    infrastructure that makes PyTorch code run efficiently across hardware con-
    figurations.89 Above it, TRL’s SFTTrainer provides training loops specifically
    designed for language model fine-tuning, with built-in support for chat templates,
    packing, and completion-only loss.75 Unsloth and Axolotl sit alongside or above
    these layers, not replacing them but enhancing them.

    Unsloth

    Unsloth focuses on training speed and memory efficiency through custom Triton
    kernels and careful memory management. The results are striking: training goes
    roughly twice as fast with 70 percent less VRAM than standard implementations.

                                                                                    (continued)



                                                  Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   87
                        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26



                     A model that requires an A100 with vanilla training might fit on a consumer RTX
                     4090 with Unsloth.
                     Beyond raw efficiency, Unsloth provides an exceptional ecosystem for getting
                     started. Its collection of Colab and Kaggle notebooks covers most popular
                     model families and use cases, offering working examples that run on free-tier
                     hardware.
                     Unsloth also supports loading models in 4-bit or 8-bit precision for inference
                     and fine-tuning, making large models accessible on consumer hardware. The
                     trade-off is that Unsloth supports a narrower range of models and configurations
                     than the general-purpose frameworks, though support expands rapidly.

                     Axolotl

                     Axolotl prioritizes configuration-driven experimentation. Training configurations
                     live in YAML files, making it trivial to switch between full fine-tuning, LoRA, and
                     QLoRA, or to experiment with hyperparameters. Under the hood, Axolotl uses
                     TRL’s Trainer and Accelerate for the actual training; it is orchestration rather
                     than reimplementation. This approach suits teams that run many experiments
                     with varying configurations, as code changes become configuration changes.
                     Axolotl integrates well with Weights & Biases for experiment tracking and sup-
                     ports most popular model architectures. Axolotl’s powerful feature of storing
                     configurations as YAML files meshes very well with pluggable configuration
                     managers like Hydra, which has emerged as the de facto standard for
                     managing complex experiment configurations in ML research.90
                     Crucially, these tools are not mutually exclusive. Axolotl can use Unsloth as its
                     backend for memory-efficient training. You might use TRL’s SFTTrainer directly
                     for simple cases, Axolotl for complex experimentation, and Unsloth when
                     memory or speed constraints bind. Many practitioners maintain familiarity with
                     all three, choosing the right tool for each situation. The common thread is that
                     all build on the same foundations—Transformers for model architectures,
                     Accelerate for distributed training, TRL for training loops—so skills transfer
                     across tools.



                 Monitoring Training Health
                 Launching a training run without monitoring is like driving blindfolded; you
                 might reach the destination, but you won’t know until you crash or arrive.
                 Monitoring provides real-time visibility into training health, enabling inter-
                 vention before problems become catastrophic as well as insight into dynam-
                 ics that inform future runs.
                      The minimal monitoring setup logs loss at regular intervals. Training
                 loss should decrease, though not monotonically, as noise from stochastic
                 batching causes fluctuation. Validation loss provides the crucial check: If
                 validation loss rises while training loss falls, the model is memorizing rather
                 than generalizing. The gap between training and validation loss indicates
                 overfitting severity. These signals alone enable basic diagnosis, and any
                 training framework provides them by default.
                      Richer monitoring records additional signals. Learning-rate evolution
                 matters because schedules vary the rate across training, and verifying that the

88   Chapter 3
               The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

       schedule behaves as expected catches configuration errors. Gradient norms
       indicate training stability: Exploding gradients (norm suddenly grows large)
       signal numerical instability, while vanishing gradients (norm approaches 0)
       suggest that the model has stopped learning. Memory utilization reveals
       whether the configuration approaches hardware limits, warning of potential
       out-of-memory failures before they occur.

NOTE   Every training run should track the following at minimum:

           Training loss This should decrease with noise. A failure to decrease indicates
           fundamental problems.
           Validation loss This should track training loss. Divergence signals
           overfitting.
           Learning rate Use to verify that the schedule executes as configured.
           Gradient norm Sudden spikes warn of instability before NaN losses appear.
           Throughput Tokens per second indicates efficiency. Sudden drops suggest
           problems.

            Experiment-tracking platforms like Weights & Biases and MLflow ele-
       vate monitoring from observation to analysis. These platforms automatically
       log metrics, visualize trends in real time, compare runs across experiments,
       and preserve history for later analysis. The investment in setup pays divi-
       dends when debugging a failing run requires comparing it to successful pre-
       decessors, or when optimizing hyperparameters requires understanding how
       previous choices performed.
            Integration with Hugging Face Trainer requires minimal configuration.
       Setting report_to="wandb" in training arguments enables automatic logging
       of all standard metrics. Custom metrics can be logged through callbacks,
       enabling domain-specific monitoring like generation-quality samples at inter-
       vals during training. The overhead is negligible (a few API calls per logging
       step, as Listing 3-3 illustrates), while the insight gained is substantial.

       from trl import SFTConfig

       config = SFTConfig(
           output_dir="./sft-output",
         ¶ report_to="wandb",
         · logging_steps=10,
           . . .
       )

       Listing 3-3: Enabling basic Weights & Biases monitoring

            By default, setting Weights & Biases logging ¶ will log training and val-
       idation loss, the learning rate schedule, gradient norms, and some system
       metrics—in this case, every 10 steps ·.
            It may often prove helpful to also sample some generations for a qualita-
       tive sense or vibe check of generated quality (Listing 3-4).


                                                       Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   89
                           The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26


                   from transformers.integrations import WandbCallback
                   import torch
                   import wandb

                   class SamplingCallback(WandbCallback):
                       def __init__(self, trainer, test_dataset, num_samples=3,
                                    max_new_tokens=128):
                           super().__init__()
                           self.trainer = trainer
                           self.sample_ds = test_dataset.select(range(num_samples))
                           self.max_new_tokens = max_new_tokens

                    ¶ def on_evaluate(self, args, state, control, **kwargs):
                          super().on_evaluate(args, state, control, **kwargs)
                          rows = []
                          for item in self.sample_ds:
                              prompt = item["prompt"]
                              inputs = self.trainer.tokenizer(
                                  prompt, return_tensors="pt"
                              ).to(self.trainer.model.device)
                           · with torch.inference_mode():
                                  outputs = self.trainer.model.generate(
                                      **inputs, max_new_tokens=self.max_new_tokens
                                  )
                              response = self.trainer.tokenizer.decode(
                                ¸ outputs[0][inputs["input_ids"].shape[1]:],
                                  skip_special_tokens=True
                              )
                              rows.append([prompt, response])
                        ¹ wandb.log({"sample_generations": wandb.Table(
                              columns=["prompt", "generation"], data=rows
                          )})

                   trainer = SFTTrainer(model, args, train_dataset,. . .)
                 º wandb_cb = SamplingCallback(trainer, eval_dataset, num_samples=5)
                 » trainer.add_callback(wandb_cb)
                   trainer.train()

                   Listing 3-4: Vibe checking through custom callbacks

                        The on_evaluate hook ¶ fires after each evaluation phase and runs the
                   generation in torch.inference_mode ·, which disables gradient computation
                   for efficiency (inference_mode is the modern version of the torch.no_grad con-
                   text manager). We slice the output ¸ to extract only the newly generated
                   tokens, excluding the input prompt, and log it as a W&B Table ¹. Note that
                   the canonical way is to instantiate the trainer, then instantiate the callback
                   º, and finally add the latter to the former ». This returns a convenient way
                   to see side-by-side qualitative comparisons across training steps. Watching

90   Chapter 3
                    The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

            these generations evolve over training provides intuition that loss curves
            alone cannot. You can see the model’s tone shift and its formatting improve,
            and you can occasionally catch regressions that metrics miss.


            Scaling to Multiple GPUs
            When models exceed single-GPU memory or training speed becomes a bot-
            tleneck, distributed training across multiple GPUs extends reach. The land-
            scape of distributed training strategies has matured rapidly, with frameworks
            abstracting complexity that once required distributed systems expertise.
                 Data parallelism replicates the model on each GPU, with different GPUs
            processing different batches. After each forward-backward pass, gradients
            synchronize across GPUs through all-reduce, ensuring that all replicas up-
            date identically. The effective batch size scales with GPU count; four GPUs
            each processing batch size 4 yield an effective batch size of 16. PyTorch’s
            DistributedDataParallel (DDP) implements this pattern efficiently and re-
            mains the default choice when models fit in single-GPU memory.91
                 Model parallelism distributes model layers across GPUs when models ex-
            ceed single-GPU memory. Different GPUs hold different parts of the model,
            with activations switching between GPUs during forward and backward
            passes. The approach enables the training of arbitrarily large models but
            introduces communication overhead as activations transfer between GPUs.
            Pipeline parallelism, a variant, reduces this overhead by overlapping compu-
            tation across micro-batches.
                 Fully sharded approaches combine the benefits of data and model par-
            allelism. DeepSpeed ZeRO partitions parameters, gradients, and optimizer
            states across GPUs, gathering them through communication when needed;92
            PyTorch’s Fully Sharded Data Parallel (FSDP) does the same. This shard-
            ing dramatically reduces per-GPU memory requirements (each GPU stores
            only a fraction of the total state) while maintaining the simplicity of a data-
            parallel programming model. A 7-billion-parameter model that requires
            80GB for full fine-tuning might fit on four GPUs with 24GB each using
            FSDP, with each GPU holding roughly one-quarter of the state.
                 The choice between DeepSpeed and FSDP depends on your require-
            ments and ecosystem. FSDP integrates natively with PyTorch, requiring no
            additional dependencies, and works well for straightforward sharding sce-
            narios. DeepSpeed offers more configuration options, including CPU and
            NVMe offloading for extreme memory constraints, and provides additional
            features like automatic mixed precision and gradient compression.
                 For fine-tuning workloads within the Hugging Face ecosystem, both
            integrate through the Accelerate library with minimal configuration changes.
            An example of a ready-to-go FSDP Accelerate configuration is set out in
            Listing 3-5.

  accelerate compute_environment: LOCAL_MACHINE
_config.yaml distributed_type: FSDP
             fsdp_config:
               fsdp_auto_wrap_policy: TRANSFORMER_BASED_WRAP

                                                            Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   91
                         The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                   fsdp_backward_prefetch: BACKWARD_PRE
                   fsdp_sharding_strategy: FULL_SHARD
                   fsdp_state_dict_type: SHARDED_STATE_DICT
                 mixed_precision: bf16
                 num_processes: 4

                 Listing 3-5: Enabling FSDP through an Accelerate configuration

                      Recent benchmarks show that with proper configuration, both ap-
                 proaches achieve similar throughput for typical fine-tuning workloads. FSDP
                 excels in simplicity when staying within PyTorch’s native capabilities suffices.
                 DeepSpeed excels when memory pressure requires advanced offloading or
                 when its additional optimizations (like ZeRO-Infinity for NVMe offloading)
                 become necessary. For most enterprise fine-tuning scenarios involving mod-
                 els up to 70 billion parameters on modest GPU clusters, either approach
                 works well.

WARNING          Distributed training introduces failure modes that do not exist in single-GPU train-
                 ing. Deadlocks occur when GPUs wait on communication that never arrives. Gradi-
                 ent synchronization bugs produce different model states on different GPUs, causing
                 training to silently diverge. Out-of-memory errors on one GPU crash the entire run.
                 Debugging these requires understanding distributed systems concepts that many ML
                 practitioners lack. For this reason, you would want to start with single-GPU train-
                 ing until you’re confident the configuration works, then scale to distributed. The
                 time saved debugging distributed failures exceeds the time spent on sequential initial
                 development.

                 Estimating and Managing Costs
                 Accurate cost estimation distinguishes feasible projects from aspirational
                 ones and enables the ROI analysis that justifies investment to stakeholders.
                 Costs fall into three major categories: compute, storage, and human effort.
                 Of these, human effort typically dominates for projects with serious quality
                 requirements, though compute receives disproportionate attention because
                 it is easier to measure.

                 Compute Cost
                 This scales approximately linearly with model parameters, dataset tokens, and
                 number of epochs. Estimating training time is not a precise science, and accu-
                 rately guessing is impossible without reflecting on the training logic, the code,
                 and any accelerators. A rough estimate for fine-tuning a 7-billion-parameter
                 model on 100,000 examples for three epochs might be 10 to 20 GPU-hours
                 on an 80GB A100, costing $20 to $50 at typical cloud rates. Larger models,
                 larger datasets, or more epochs scale proportionally. Parameter-efficient
                 methods substantially reduce compute requirements, often by an order
                 of magnitude, shifting the cost structure decisively toward data curation
                 rather than training. Spot instances or preemptible virtual machines can
                 reduce cloud compute costs by up to 70 percent compared to on-demand
                 pricing, albeit with the risk of interruptions that require checkpointing and

92   Chapter 3
                The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

        recovery strategies. Tools like SkyPilot reduce the engineering overhead
        through auto-checkpointing and relatively seamless recovery.93

        Storage
        Costs are usually minor relative to compute but can accumulate unexpectedly.
        Model checkpoints can require tens of gigabytes each, and saving checkpoints
        every few hundred steps across multiple experimental runs produces ter-
        abytes of data. Cloud storage is cheap per gigabyte but expensive when
        terabytes accumulate unnoticed. A disciplined checkpoint-rotation policy
        and regular cleanup of failed experiments keeps storage manageable.

        Human Effort
        This aspect dominates the total cost for projects where data quality matters.
        A data curator producing 100 carefully crafted examples per day at typical
        professional rates generates data far more slowly than GPU-hours accumu-
        late. The cost of expert annotation for domain-specific tasks can exceed
        compute costs by an order of magnitude. This reality argues for investing
        heavily in data quality tools, verification pipelines, and annotator training, as
        anything that improves data quality per unit of human effort has an outsized
        impact on total project economics.


                                     ALWAYS BE COSTING

            I have always been in awe of my colleagues at various enterprise clients who
            could give me an almost dollar-accurate estimate for the cost of various cloud
            services and infrastructure needs—and they would be right almost every time.
            As I have come to learn, this is not magic but experience.
            What set these star estimators apart from their less proficient kin was not tenure
            but a habit of always checking the cost of jobs. We may be tempted to just be
            glad that the job finished with exit code 0, but architects who become proficient
            at costing almost always spend time retrospectively examining the bill. Was it
            more than expected? Could we have used a different service? Maybe a different
            region with slightly more advantageous pricing, or a more disciplined policy
            around retention? Was the equipment used to the fullest? It may be rather embar-
            rassing to admit having paid for a B200 GPU to run a quick LoRA on a 3B class
            model, but it also is the kind of mistake you would not make twice. If in doubt,
            since costs scale fairly predictably, micro-batch tests can be run very quickly to
            compare vendors, architectures, and speeds—especially if you are following
            good experiment management practices!




Reading Training Signals
        In most of “traditional” ML with gradient-based methods, the gradient norm
        and the training curve tell most of the story. Not only is this generally not the
        case in post-training, but many of the indicators can behave rather counterin-
        tuitively to a mind used to traditional ML metrics. This section eases us into
        the habit of metrics-driven post-training with our still familiar case of SFT.

                                                         Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   93
                                    The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                        What Loss Curves Are Trying to Tell You
                        The loss curve is to the ML practitioner what the vital signs chart is to the
                        clinician: the primary indicator of whether things are proceeding as they
                        should. Learning to read loss curves, to recognize healthy patterns and diag-
                        nose pathological ones, is among the most valuable skills a practitioner can
                        develop.
                             It is helpful to recall the geometric intuition of the fine-tuning process
                        that we developed in Chapter 2. The model traverses a high-dimensional
                        loss landscape, descending toward minima that represent better fits to the
                        training data. The loss curve traces this descent over time, revealing how
                        effectively the model learns, and the gradient magnitude represents the
                        steepness of the curve—or in more geometric terms, the distance from an
                        idealized minimum in parameter space together with the model’s current
                        approach velocity. This intuition is helpful to explain both vanishing gradi-
                        ents (the model is going nowhere) and exploding gradients (going too fast
                        for its own good). Table 3-1 summarizes common loss curve patterns and
                        their interpretations.

Table 3-1: Loss Curve Diagnostics: Patterns and Their Causes
                 Pattern               Likely cause                          Remedy
                 Loss does not         Learning rate too low; data-          Increase learning rate (LR) by
                 decrease              loading bug; format mismatch          10×; verify data pipeline; check
                                                                             chat template
                 Wild                  Learning rate too high                Reduce LR by 10×; add warm-up
                 oscillations
                 Sudden spike          Numerical instability; gradient       Enable gradient clipping; reduce
                                       explosion                             LR; check for anomalous examples
                 Gradual rise          Catastrophic forgetting               Reduce LR; add regularization;
                                                                             check data distribution
                 Train drops,          Overfitting                           Early stopping; increase dropout;
                 validation rises                                            add data
                 Train ≈ 0             Memorization                          Reduce epochs; add regulariza-
                                                                             tion; increase diversity
                 Both plateau          Underfitting; capacity limit          Increase LR; train longer; use
                 early                                                       larger model
                 Validation very       Validation set too small; distribu-   Increase val set size; check val
                 noisy                 tion mismatch                         distribution


                             Just as for conventional ML training runs, a healthy fine-tuning loss curve
                        shows rapid initial decline as the model adapts to the fine-tuning distribution,
                        followed by gradual flattening as the model approaches its capacity to fit
                        the training data. The training loss and validation loss should track each
                        other closely, with training loss slightly lower. As training progresses, the gap
                        between them may widen slightly, but they should continue moving in the
                        same direction. When training loss continues to fall but validation loss rises,
                        overfitting has begun, and the model is memorizing training examples rather


94   Chapter 3
                   The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

          than learning generalizable patterns. This divergence signals that training
          should stop or that regularization should increase.
               Other patterns indicate other problems. A loss that fails to decrease
          suggests a learning rate that is too low, a data-loading bug, or a format mis-
          match that prevents the model from engaging with the task. A loss that os-
          cillates wildly suggests a learning rate that is too high, causing the model to
          bounce around the loss landscape rather than descend into a minimum. A
          loss that decreases but then suddenly spikes may indicate numerical instabil-
          ity, often caused by learning rate or gradient issues. Each pattern has charac-
          teristic causes, and learning to map patterns to causes enables rapid diagno-
          sis. The practitioner who stares at the loss curve understands nothing, while
          the practitioner who reads the loss curve understands the training.

WARNING   A training loss that falls to near zero is not a success signal; it is a warning. In fine-
          tuning, extremely low loss usually indicates memorization rather than generaliza-
          tion. The model has learned to reproduce training examples verbatim rather than
          learning patterns that transfer. Watch the validation loss. If training loss plummets
          while validation loss stagnates or rises, the model is memorizing. Stop training, add
          regularization, or acquire more-diverse data. A healthy loss curve shows training
          and validation declining together, with a modest gap.

          The Art of Holding Data Back
          Validation loss is meaningful only if the validation set represents deploy-
          ment conditions. A validation set drawn from the same distribution as train-
          ing data measures the model’s ability to fit that distribution, not its ability
          to generalize to real-world inputs. The validation set should look like what
          the model will actually encounter: the same distribution of task difficulty,
          the same input format, the same edge cases that deployment will present.
          Constructing such a validation set requires understanding the deployment
          context deeply enough to sample from it accurately.
               The temporal separation between training and validation data matters
          in many contexts. If training data comes from one time period and deploy-
          ment will see data from a later period, the validation set should reflect the
          later period’s characteristics. Seasonal patterns, vocabulary drift, and topic
          evolution all create gaps between training and deployment distributions. A
          validation set that captures these gaps provides honest assessment of deploy-
          ment performance, while one that doesn’t may overestimate success.
               Evaluation frequency presents practical trade-offs. Evaluating after every
          gradient step catches problems immediately but adds computational over-
          head and may produce noisy signals. Evaluating only at the end of training is
          efficient but provides no opportunity to detect and correct overfitting mid-
          run. Common practice evaluates every few hundred or few thousand steps,
          frequently enough to catch trends but infrequently enough to be efficient.
          The evaluation schedule should be fixed before training begins, as adjusting
          it based on observed results invites the same selection bias problems that
          fixed validation sets exist to prevent.


                                                           Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   95
                        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                 Verification Beyond Loss Metrics
                 Loss curves confirm that the model is learning something, but not what. A
                 model might achieve excellent validation loss while producing outputs that
                 fail in ways the loss cannot capture: subtle format errors, tone mismatches,
                 or capabilities that technically work but feel wrong. Verification bridges this
                 gap between optimization metrics and actual fitness for purpose.
                       The simplest verification is generation testing: Present the trained model
                 with representative prompts and examine its outputs. This is the vibe testing
                 mentioned in the baby baseline methodology, but applied systematically. Se-
                 lect 20 to 50 prompts that span your use case, generate responses, and read
                 them carefully. Does the model follow expected formats? Does it maintain
                 appropriate tone? Does it handle edge cases sensibly? Human inspection
                 catches problems that metrics miss, because humans evaluate the gestalt of a
                 response rather than averaging over tokens.
                       Comparative verification further strengthens confidence. Generate
                 responses from both the fine-tuned model and the base model (or a previous
                 checkpoint) for the same prompts. Side-by-side comparison reveals whether
                 fine-tuning improved behavior or merely changed it. A model that correctly
                 formats responses but loses the base model’s factual grounding has not
                 improved, even if its loss decreased. Comparative testing exposes these
                 trade-offs.
                       Memorization testing checks whether the model generalized or merely
                 memorized. Paraphrase a few training examples and observe the responses.
                 A model that generalized will produce appropriate but distinct responses,
                 while a model that memorized will reproduce training responses verbatim or
                 fail entirely on the paraphrased version. Finding memorization early enables
                 intervention: more diverse data, stronger regularization, or fewer training
                 epochs.


                                        VIBES AREN’T VERIFICATION

                     Looking at a few rollouts and declaring that the model “looks good” is sometimes
                     tempting. The problem is that we are often training for things that are hard to
                     define and may even be a matter of reasoned disagreement. When does a model
                     trained to use a “professional tone” achieve that? When does a model trained to
                     avoid harmful content actually avoid it?
                     Relying on vague impressions invites bias and overconfidence. Unfortunately,
                     many well-meaning tutorials fall into this trap. Structured testing to determine
                     whether the model has indeed attained its training objectives is relatively rare.
                     This is a problem when having to reason about what’s next—more training,
                     progressing to RL, deployment, or calling it a day and pursuing another
                     approach altogether.
                     These impressions ought to be quantitative definitions, and in the ROI-focused
                     world of enterprise AI, they usually are. “The rollouts looked fine” is not going
                     to meet the bar for most stakeholders. Therefore, approaching verification
                     scientifically is crucial: Form a hypothesis, clarify your expectations, define how
                     you will measure, then gather evidence. Table 3-2 sets out the key metrics for
                     SFT validation.


96   Chapter 3
            The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

     For tasks with objective correctness criteria, automated verification com-
plements human inspection. If fine-tuning taught the model to produce
valid JSON, validate the JSON. If it taught structured extraction, verify ex-
tracted fields against ground truth. Automated checks scale where human
inspection cannot, though they catch only the failures you anticipate. The
combination of automated checks for known failure modes and human in-
spection for unknown ones provides reasonable coverage. Objective cor-
rectness, of course, is rather relative. Methodologies like LLM-as-a-judge or
even simple embedding distance metrics can provide some objectivity. For
instance, a small embedding model can often be a good detector of subject
pertinence, indicating that the model is responding into the correct concep-
tual space.

Table 3-2: Quick-Reference Metrics for SFT Verification
 Metric          Tests for               Implementation                 SFT interpretation
 Perplexity      Model confidence        TorchMetrics,                  Lower is better; val
                 on held-out data        HF Evaluate                    increase signals
                                                                        overfitting
 Exact           Perfect response        Manual or regex                Target 80%–95% for
 match           correctness                                            structured tasks
 ROUGE-L         Structural similarity   HF Evaluate,                   F1 > 0.5 suggests
                 to references           TorchMetrics                   format adherence
 BERTScore       Semantic                bert-score package             F1 > 0.85 indicates
                 equivalence                                            good alignment
 Format          Structural com-         jsonschema, custom             Target 95%–100% for
 validity        pliance (JSON,          validators                     production
                 schema)
 Embedding Topical relevance             Sentence-Transformers          Cosine > 0.7 suggests
 similarity                                                             on-topic responses


    Verification proceeds from cheap to expensive (the verification hierar-
chy), stopping when confidence is sufficient:
    Loss curves Training and validation trending correctly? (Seconds to
    check)
    Spot generation Do a handful of outputs look right? (Minutes)
    Systematic generation Do 50 diverse prompts produce good outputs?
    (Hours)
    Comparative testing Is the fine-tuned model better than the base?
    (Hours)
    Formal evaluation Benchmarks, human evaluation, A/B testing (Days
    to weeks)
Most fine-tuning failures are caught by levels 1 to 3. Reserve formal evalua-
tion for models that pass informal verification.



                                                     Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   97
                        The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                      No single metric is going to give you all the information. The notebook
                 accompanying this chapter (notebooks/chapter-03-sft) includes a multistage ver-
                 ification pathway, which exemplifies how quantitative and qualitative met-
                 rics can work in tandem to help identify training issues.


                 Saving Your Work (and Your Sanity)
                 Checkpointing saves model state at intervals during training, enabling recov-
                 ery from failures and selection of the best model across training. Frequent
                 checkpointing is also a good auditability habit that allows deep offline intro-
                 spection into the progress of the training run. A training run that crashes
                 without checkpoints loses all progress, while one with checkpoints loses only
                 the progress since the last checkpoint.
                      The best checkpoint is often not the final one. Overfitting causes valida-
                 tion performance to peak before training ends, meaning the optimal model
                 exists at an intermediate point. Without checkpoints at that point, you can-
                 not recover the previous model. A common pattern saves checkpoints every
                 n steps while also maintaining the best checkpoint seen so far according to
                 validation metrics. At the end of training, you have both the final model and
                 the best-performing one and can choose whichever serves your purposes.
                      Checkpoint storage, however, does impose costs that must be managed.
                 A 7-billion-parameter model checkpoint occupies roughly 14GB in float16
                 precision, and a 70-billion-parameter checkpoint occupies 140GB. Saving
                 every 100 steps across a training run of 10,000 steps produces 100 check-
                 points, which may total more than a terabyte for large models.
                      Rotating checkpoints (keeping only the most recent k and deleting older
                 ones) manages storage while preserving recovery capability. The trade-off
                 is that you cannot return to arbitrarily early states, only to recent ones. In
                 TRL, the Trainer class supports automatic checkpoint rotation through the
                 save_total_limit parameter, simplifying this management; as a general rule,
                 keeping the last 3 to 5 checkpoints suffices for most recovery needs. One
                 point to keep in mind is that if you rely on early stopping based on valida-
                 tion performance, you may want to set the number of checkpoints to keep to
                 be at least as large as your patience parameter.


     When SFT Is Enough
                 Knowing when to stop at SFT and when to move on to RL is an essential
                 skill. RL and other advanced approaches demand significant additional
                 infrastructure and expertise. For a remarkable range of tasks, SFT proves
                 optimal. For others, it is but one step toward the desired result. Knowing
                 when to stop, whether to move on, and if so when, saves both resources and
                 complexity.




98   Chapter 3
               The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

       Finding the SFT Sweet Spot
       The cases where SFT on its own proves optimal share a common character-
       istic: The desired behavior can be demonstrated through examples. Rec-
       ognizing these cases early saves the complexity and cost of techniques that
       provide no additional benefit.
             A canonical success case is format adaptation—teaching a model to pro-
       duce JSON, Markdown, or other structured outputs. You can write exam-
       ples of correct formatting, the model can learn from them, and you are
       done. Style transfer operates similarly: Show the model examples of the
       desired writing style, and it learns to produce that style. Domain vocabu-
       lary adoption, structured output generation, template following, citation
       formatting—any task where you can produce perfect examples that cover the
       relevant variation is a candidate for SFT-only training.
             The common thread is that you can demonstrate correct behavior, not
       just recognize it. The distinction is important. SFT requires demonstrations
       of correct behavior, while RL requires only behavior evaluations. Tasks that
       fall into the latter category, where quality is easy to assess but hard to gener-
       ate, are where RL becomes necessary.

NOTE   Ask yourself: “Can I write the perfect response for this input?” If you answer yes for
       most inputs in your domain, SFT will likely succeed. If you can say only, “I would
       recognize a good response when I see one,” you need RL or human feedback. Format
       tasks (JSON, structured output) pass the demonstration test easily. Creativity tasks
       (engaging writing, persuasive argument) often fail it. This single question predicts
       which technique to use better than any technical consideration. “I know it when I see
       it” (the Lemon test) is usually a sign that some sort of preference modeling is needed.

       Recognizing Diminishing Returns
       Performance gains from additional SFT data or more runs follow a pre-
       dictable pattern: dramatic improvement from the first examples, progres-
       sively smaller gains as the dataset grows.94 The relationship is approximately
       logarithmic. A dataset of 100 examples might produce substantial improve-
       ment. Growing to 1,000 produces more, and growing to 10,000 produces
       still more, but the performance increments shrink. Eventually, you reach a
       regime where doubling the dataset produces gains barely distinguishable
       from noise.
             Recognizing when you have reached this plateau is crucial for resource
       allocation. More data takes time and money to collect, and if additional data
       yields negligible improvement, that time and money is wasted. Plotting per-
       formance against dataset size (on a log scale) reveals where you are on the
       curve. If the curve is flattening, more data will not help much. If the curve
       still rises steeply, more data is the highest-value investment available.
             A plateau can mean two things. If validation performance is satisfactory,
       the plateau means success; the model has learned what it needs to learn, and
       you are done. If validation performance is unsatisfactory, the plateau means



                                                       Supervised Fine-Tuning: The Foundation Technique   99
                          The Craft of Post-Training (Sample Chapter) © 6/18/26

                  that SFT has reached its limits for this task. More data will not help because
                  the model has already learned what the data can teach. The gap between
                  current performance and desired performance cannot be closed by more
                  examples of the same kind. Either the data needs to change in character
                  (better quality, different distribution), or the approach needs to change (RL,
                  different model architecture). Recognizing a performance plateau in the
                  unsatisfactory region is a signal to reconsider or evolve strategy, not to collect
                  more data.


                  Graduating to Reinforcement Learning
                  As noted at the beginning of this chapter, SFT is a natural starting point. It is
                  not always a destination, however. In fact, the standard post-training pipeline
                  as practiced by frontier labs or sophisticated applications proceeds from SFT
                  to RL. This ordering is not arbitrary convention but reflects the different
                  capabilities each stage develops. SFT establishes the foundations: correct
                  formatting, appropriate vocabulary, task understanding, domain knowledge.
                  RL then refines quality within those foundations, optimizing for aspects of
                  response quality that can be recognized but not easily demonstrated.
                       This synergistic relationship between SFT and RL is not accidental. In a
                  recent paper, Matsutani et al. analyzed the reasoning trajectories of models
                  trained with SFT versus RL and found a striking asymmetry: SFT expands
                  the space of correct reasoning paths but also preserves incorrect ones, while
                  RL compresses incorrect paths but tends to reduce correct ones as well.95
                  This explains why the two-stage approach works so effectively. First, SFT
                  broadens the model’s repertoire of valid solutions, then RL prunes away
                  the errors without needing to discover correct paths from scratch. This also
                  underlines the evident utility of multiple cascades of SFT followed by RL,
                  which is now the standard approach for large-scale post-training.


      Summary

                  The transition from SFT to RL should occur when SFT has taught what it
                  can teach but a quality gap remains. The symptoms are easy to spot, albeit
                  somewhat less easy to define. The model produces correctly formatted, topi-
                  cally appropriate responses that nonetheless lack the quality you care about,
                  such as persuasiveness, clinical appropriateness, elegance, reason, insight,
                  or simply that ineffable sense of a response that truly serves the user. You
                  can recognize this quality when you see it, but you cannot easily produce ex-
                  amples that demonstrate it. At this point, RL becomes necessary, because
                  a reward model can capture this recognition, and RL can then optimize to-
                  ward it. The combination closes the gap that SFT alone cannot, and the next
                  chapter is therefore devoted to the myriad flavors of RL.




100   Chapter 3
