Lesson 2
     MEETING
    FACEBOOK
             In this lesson, you’ll meet Facebook and
        learn your way around so that you can dive into
         all that Facebook has to offer with conﬁdence.




What Is Facebook For? ................................................ 22
Oh Dear, Do I Need My Password? ............................. 22
     Logging In to Facebook ........................................ 22
     I Forgot My Password! .......................................... 25
     Logging Out of Facebook..................................... 25
Welcome to the News Feed Page ............................... 27
     The Facebook Toolbar .......................................... 28
     The Side Menu ...................................................... 31
     The News Feed Column ....................................... 34
     Chat ...................................................................... 36
       What Is Facebook For?
       Now that you’ve created a Facebook account, you’ve become a
       bona ﬁde Facebook user! Facebook has a lot to offer, so ﬁrst let’s
       look at what you might use Facebook for.

       The main purpose of Facebook is to connect with other users. Facebook
       users you’ve connected with are known as friends, and your Facebook
       friends will usually be family members or friends who you already know
       or knew at some point in your life. After you’ve connected on Facebook,
       you can share and discuss your activities, news, life updates, stories,
       photos, and videos with each other. You can also play games together,
       chat live through typed messages, and send out invitations to events
       (like your birthday).


       Oh Dear, Do I Need My Password?
       To use the Facebook account that you created in the Introduction,
       you must be logged in. You’re going to need the email address and
       password you created your Facebook account with, so before you begin
       this lesson, dig out your details!

       LOGGING IN TO FACEB O OK
       Follow these steps to log in to Facebook:

        1    Open your internet browser. Whether the browser you use is
             Internet Explorer, Microsoft Edge, Safari, Google Chrome, or
             Mozilla Firefox, that won’t make any difference to Facebook!

        2    Enter www.facebook.com in the address bar, as shown below.
             The address bar is the long box at the top of the browser window
             that you can type website addresses into.




22
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
3   Press the ENTER key on your keyboard to load the Facebook
    website. You should see something like this:




    The blue bar at the top of the page is where you enter your email
    and password to log in.

4   Click in the Email or Phone box and then enter the email address
    you used when you created your Facebook account.




5   Now click in the Password box and enter your password, as shown
    below.




                                                                          23
                                               OH DEAR, DO I NEED MY PASSWORD?
        6    The password appears as dots to better protect your privacy.
             If you prefer to see your password text as you type, click the eye
             symbol at the end of the Password box (highlighted below).




        7    Click the Log In button.




        8    Congratulations! You should now be logged in to Facebook and
             should see a screen like this:




24
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
               I FORGOT MY PASSWORD!
    If you signed up for a Facebook account some time ago but
    you’re not sure which email address or password you used to
    create your account, try signing in with the email and password
    you think you used. If that doesn’t work, click the Forgot your
    password? option under the Password box, as shown here.




    This will open a page where you can enter your name or email
    address to try to identify your account. If you can identify your
    account from the list Facebook provides, a new password will
    be emailed to you and you can log back in! If you can’t rescue
    your previous account, you can sign up for a new one, but you’ll
    have to use a completely different email address from the one
    you used for your existing account. This might mean that you
    need to create a brand-new email address as well.




LO GGING OUT OF FACEB O OK
If you share your computer with others or are using a public computer,
always log out of Facebook once you’re done using it. If you don’t log
out, others will be able to access your Facebook account.

1    To log out, ﬁnd the blue strip at the top of the Facebook page.

2    Click the downward-pointing arrow.




                                                                             25
                                                  OH DEAR, DO I NEED MY PASSWORD?
        3    Click Log Out in the menu that opens.




        4    You should now be logged out of Facebook, as shown below.




26
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
                        ACTIVITY #1
    In this activity, you’re going to practice logging in and out of
    Facebook to keep your account safe.

    1.   If you’ve closed Facebook, open it again by typing
         www.facebook.com into your internet browser and
         pressing ENTER.

    2.   Log in to your Facebook account.

    3.   Try logging out of Facebook. Once you have successfully
         logged out, you should see the Facebook website
         displaying the Log In screen.

    4.   Log back in to your Facebook account.




Welcome to the News Feed Page
There’s so much you can do on Facebook, but let’s start by getting
acquainted with the News Feed page. The News Feed page is
Facebook’s home page; it’s the ﬁrst page you’ll see each time you
log in to Facebook. It’s a kind of mission control!

Log in to Facebook. If you’ve just created your account, you may
see a Welcome screen instead of the News Feed page. If so, click the
News Feed button from the left side of the page to open the News
Feed page.

Let’s explore the News Feed page now.




                                                                              27
                                                     WELCOME TO THE NEWS FEED PAGE
        The Toolbar is a quick way to                        This section displays news stories,
        find things, reach useful pages,                     friend recommendations, or ads.
        and get updates.                                     Do your best to ignore the ads!




        Use the Side Menu      Your News Feed will display      Chat lets you have live, written
        to go to pages on      your friends’ recent posts.      conversations with friends who
        Facebook.                                               are logged in to Facebook.



       THE FACEB O OK TO OLBAR
       The Facebook Toolbar will appear at the top of every Facebook page.
       It includes a number of buttons that give you quick ways of doing
       important jobs, like searching for friends and opening particular pages.

       Let’s take a look at each button, starting from the left. (All of these
       buttons and pages will be discussed in detail throughout this book.)




28
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
                                   Return to the                Change your
                                   News Feed page               privacy settings
Return to the
News Feed page        Open your profile page        Search for friends



   Search Facebook              See updates on friend requests, messages,
                                profile posts, events, and games
                                               Change your settings and get help


     The f Button
     Click this button to return to the News Feed page.

     The Search Box
     Use the search box to ﬁnd the Proﬁle pages of your Facebook
     friends, groups to join, and many other things. The description
     in your search box might change depending on which internet
     browser you’re using. For example, your search box might read
     “Search Facebook” instead of “Find friends,” but it won’t make
     any difference to your search. You’ll learn more about searching
     Facebook as you work through this book.

     Your Name and Photo
     This button shows your name and the picture you added when
     you set up your account. Click your name (Carrie, in this case) to
     move to your Proﬁle page. Your Proﬁle is your space on Facebook
     to share things like life updates and photos with your Facebook
     friends. We’ll call this button the Proﬁle button from now on. You’ll
     learn more about your Proﬁle in Lesson 3.

     Home
     Click this button to return to the News Feed page. (It does the
     same job as the Facebook f button!)



                                                                                   29
                                                       WELCOME TO THE NEWS FEED PAGE
             Find Friends
             Click this button to search for other Facebook users. Once you ﬁnd
             them, you can request to become their Facebook friend, which
             we’ll look at in Lesson 4.

             Friendship Notification
             Click this button to see any updates about friend requests you have
             sent or requests that people have sent you. If this button has a red
             number next to it, you have new friend requests. Click the button
             to review them. You’ll learn more about adding and accepting
             friends in Lesson 4.

             Message Notification
             Click this button to send a friend a message only the two of you
             can read (known as a private message) or to read private messages
             sent to you. If this button has a red number next to it, you have
             new messages. Click the button to view them. You’ll learn more
             about private messages in Lesson 10.

             Notification
             Click this button to view notiﬁcations about activity on your Proﬁle,
             such as if a friend posts a comment to your Proﬁle or you’ve been
             invited to an event. If this button has a red number next to it, you
             have new notiﬁcations. Click the button to review them. You’ll learn
             more about receiving notiﬁcations throughout this book!

             Privacy Lock Icon
             Click this button (which may look like a question mark, depending
             on your browser) to examine your privacy settings, which determine
             who can contact you and who can see the stories, photos, and
             videos you add to Facebook. You’ll learn more about privacy
             throughout this book and in Lesson 12.



30
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
     Downward-Pointing Arrow
     Click this button to manage your account settings, including
     account security, seeking help, reporting a problem, and logging
     out of Facebook. We’ll look at this in more detail in Lesson 12.




                       ACTIVITY #2
    Try to answer these questions by choosing the correct button
    on the Facebook Toolbar.
    1.   If you wanted to review your Facebook privacy settings,
         which button would you click to begin?
    2.   If you wanted to ﬁnd a dear friend to add her as a
         Facebook friend, which button might you click to begin?
    3.   If you wanted to see the latest photos added by your
         Facebook friend on her Proﬁle, where would you enter her
         name to begin?




THE SIDE MENU
The Side Menu (circled at the top of the next page) provides a great way
to access a lot of features. It appears only on the News Feed page, so to
use it you need to open the News Feed page ﬁrst. You’ll get the hang of
this very quickly and will ﬁnd yourself using the News Feed page as your
home base most of the time. The Side Menu will soon become your
favorite way of moving around Facebook!




                                                                            31
                                                   WELCOME TO THE NEWS FEED PAGE
          0 NOTE: If you created your Facebook
             account between 2015 and early 2016,
             and if you are using Facebook on Internet
             Explorer or Microsoft Edge, then your Side
             Menu may look a little different. Almost all
             of the same buttons will still be there, but
             your Side Menu may look like the image
             shown to the right.

       Let’s explore some of the most important
       features that can be accessed from the
       Side Menu.




32
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
Your Name and Photo
Click your name (Carrie Ewin, in my case) to open your Proﬁle
page. This button does exactly the same job as clicking the Proﬁle
button (your name and photo) on the Facebook Toolbar at the top
of the screen! You’ll learn more about your Proﬁle in Lesson 3.

Edit Profile
This button takes you to your biography, the section of your Proﬁle
where you can add or edit information about you.

Welcome
Click this button to read a short introduction to Facebook, which
will appear in the News Feed column of the News Feed page. Your
Welcome button will disappear after you’ve used Facebook a few
times and might even already be gone from your Side Menu.

News Feed
The News Feed button takes you straight to the News Feed page!
As you can see, Facebook gives you a lot of ways to return to the
News Feed page, because it’s the page you’re likely to use most
often. You’ll learn more about the News Feed page in Lesson 7.

Messages
Use the Messages button to send a friend a private message or
to read private messages sent to you. This button might also be
called Messenger. You’ll learn more about private messages in
Lesson 10.

Events
Click the Events button to see notiﬁcations of upcoming Events.
The Events feature helps you receive and send invitations to
parties or gatherings. You’ll learn more about the Events feature
in Lesson 11.


                                                                      33
                                             WELCOME TO THE NEWS FEED PAGE
             Games
             Use the Games button to ﬁnd games to play. Facebook offers
             a huge selection of games that are free to play, like solitaire,
             blackjack, and chess. You can play against the computer or even
             against your Facebook friends! You’ll learn more about Facebook
             games in Lesson 8.

             Photos
             Click the Photos button to quickly view photos you’ve added to
             Facebook.

             Find Friends
             Use the Find Friends button to search for people on Facebook and
             send them a friend request. This button does exactly the same job
             as the Find Friends button from the Facebook Toolbar, so you can
             click either button to begin ﬁnding friends. You’ll learn more about
             ﬁnding friends in Lesson 4.

             Discover Groups
             Click the Discover Groups button to ﬁnd groups you might like
             to join. A Facebook Group can be like a club where people with
             similar interests come together to chat, such as a group dedicated
             to discussing gardening, or it can be used as a way to share
             information with a bunch of Facebook friends all at once—for
             instance, you might have a group with friends from the same high
             school. You’ll learn more about Groups in Lesson 9.

       THE NEWS FEED COLUMN
       The News Feed column is the middle section of your News Feed page
       and is perhaps the main attraction of this page. The purpose of the
       News Feed column is to display stories, updates, news, photos, and
       videos from your Facebook friends. At the moment, before you’ve
       added any friends, your News Feed column will be empty, as shown on
       the next page.
34
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
But don’t worry, because after you have added Facebook friends, your
News Feed column will ﬁll up with interesting posts, as shown below.
Your News Feed column will then be an excellent place to get quick
updates on what your Facebook friends have been doing. You’ll learn
more about the News Feed column in Lesson 7.




                                                                          35
                                                 WELCOME TO THE NEWS FEED PAGE
       CHAT
       The Chat feature lets you have instant, written conversations with
       Facebook friends. Chat conversations happen in real time, so as long
       as you and your friend are logged in to Facebook at the same time, you
       can be typing and reading conversations live! Using Chat invites your
       friend to respond right away, unlike a message or email, which might
       take a few days or more to get a response.

       The Chat bar, shown below, is a small, rectangular box marked Chat that
       appears on every page of Facebook. When you click the Chat box, it
       will expand to show you a list of friends who are logged in and ready to
       chat. If your screen is larger, instead of this box you might see a column
       of names along the right side of your screen. You’ll learn more about
       chatting in Lesson 10.




36
LESSON 2: MEETING FACEBOOK
Phew, We Did It!
In this lesson, we covered some Facebook basics. We explored how to:

   0 Log in and out

   0 Recover a forgotten password

   0 Navigate the News Feed page

Now that you’ve met the many exciting features on Facebook, it’s time
to meet your Proﬁle, which you’ll do in the next lesson.




                   LESSON REVIEW
    Congratulations, you’ve completed Lesson 2! Take this
    opportunity to review what you’ve learned by answering
    the following questions. If you can do so with conﬁdence,
    you’re ready for Lesson 3. If not, don’t lose heart—just keep
    practicing!

    1.   How do you view your Proﬁle page?

    2.   You would like to connect with an old buddy. Which
         button do you use to ﬁnd him and add him as a friend?

    3.   If you want to play a new game, which button would you
         use to ﬁnd it?

    4.   If you’re concerned about your privacy settings, how do
         you review them?




                                                                               37
                                                                    PHEW, WE DID IT!
